Mind precedes all mental states. Mind is their
chief; they are all mind-wrought. If with an
impure mind a person speaks or acts suffering
follows him like the wheel that follows the foot
of the ox.

			 Dhammapada - 1
%
Mind precedes all mental states. Mind is their
chief; they are all mind-wrought. If with a pure
mind a person speaks or acts happiness follows him
like his never-departing shadow.

			 Dhammapada - 2
%
“He abused me, he struck me, he overpowered me, he
robbed me.” Those who harbor such thoughts do not
still their hatred.

			 Dhammapada - 3
%
“He abused me, he struck me, he overpowered me, he
robbed me.” Those who do not harbor such thoughts
still their hatred.

			 Dhammapada - 4
%
Hatred is never appeased by hatred in this world.
By non-hatred alone is hatred appeased. This is a
law eternal.

			 Dhammapada - 5
%
There are those who do not realize that one day we
all must die. But those who do realize this settle
their quarrels.

			 Dhammapada - 6
%
Just as a storm throws down a weak tree, so does
Mara overpower the man who lives for the pursuit
of pleasures, who is uncontrolled in his senses,
immoderate in eating, indolent, and dissipated.

			 Dhammapada - 7
%
Just as a storm cannot prevail against a rocky
mountain, so Mara can never overpower the man who
lives meditating on the impurities, who is
controlled in his senses, moderate in eating, and
filled with faith and earnest effort.

			 Dhammapada - 8
%
Whoever being depraved, devoid of self-control and
truthfulness, should don the monk’s yellow robe,
he surely is not worthy of the robe.

			 Dhammapada - 9
%
But whoever is purged of depravity, well-
established in virtues and filled with self-
control and truthfulness, he indeed is worthy of
the yellow robe.

			 Dhammapada - 10
%
Those who mistake the unessential to be essential
and the essential to be unessential, dwelling in
wrong thoughts, never arrive at the essential.

			 Dhammapada - 11
%
Those who know the essential to be essential and
the unessential to be unessential, dwelling in
right thoughts, do arrive at the essential.

			 Dhammapada - 12
%
Just as rain breaks through an ill-thatched house,
so passion penetrates an undeveloped mind.

			 Dhammapada - 13
%
Just as rain does not break through a well-
thatched house, so passion never penetrates a
well-developed mind.

			 Dhammapada - 14
%
The evil-doer grieves here and hereafter; he
grieves in both the worlds. He laments and is
afflicted, recollecting his own impure deeds.

			 Dhammapada - 15
%
The doer of good rejoices here and hereafter; he
rejoices in both the worlds. He rejoices and
exults, recollecting his own pure deeds.

			 Dhammapada - 16
%
The evil-doer suffers here and hereafter; he
suffers in both the worlds. The thought, “Evil
have I done,” torments him, and he suffers even
more when gone to realms of woe.

			 Dhammapada - 17
%
The doer of good delights here and hereafter; he
delights in both the worlds. The thought, “Good
have I done,” delights him, and he delights even
more when gone to realms of bliss.

			 Dhammapada - 18
%
Much though he recites the sacred texts, but acts
not accordingly, that heedless man is like a
cowherd who only counts the cows of others—he does
not partake of the blessings of the holy life.

			 Dhammapada - 19
%
Little though he recites the sacred texts, but
puts the Teaching into practice, forsaking lust,
hatred, and delusion, with true wisdom and
emancipated mind, clinging to nothing of this or
any other world—he indeed partakes of the
blessings of a holy life.

			 Dhammapada - 20
%
Heedfulness is the path to the Deathless.
Heedlessness is the path to death. The heedful die
not. The heedless are as if dead already.

			 Dhammapada - 21
%
Clearly understanding this excellence of
heedfulness, the wise exult therein and enjoy the
resort of the Noble Ones.

			 Dhammapada - 22
%
The wise ones, ever meditative and steadfastly
persevering, alone experience Nibbana, the
incomparable freedom from bondage.

			 Dhammapada - 23
%
Ever grows the glory of him who is energetic,
mindful and pure in conduct, discerning and self-
controlled, righteous and heedful.

			 Dhammapada - 24
%
By effort and heedfulness, discipline and self-
mastery, let the wise one make for himself an
island which no flood can overwhelm.

			 Dhammapada - 25
%
The foolish and ignorant indulge in heedlessness,
but the wise one keeps his heedfulness as his best
treasure.

			 Dhammapada - 26
%
Do not give way to heedlessness. Do not indulge in
sensual pleasures. Only the heedful and meditative
attain great happiness.

			 Dhammapada - 27
%
Just as one upon the summit of a mountain beholds
the groundlings, even so when the wise man casts
away heedlessness by heedfulness and ascends the
high tower of wisdom, this sorrowless sage beholds
the sorrowing and foolish multitude.

			 Dhammapada - 28
%
Heedful among the heedless, wide-awake among the
sleepy, the wise man advances like a swift horse
leaving behind a weak jade.

			 Dhammapada - 29
%
By Heedfulness did Indra become the overlord of
the gods. Heedfulness is ever praised, and
heedlessness ever despised.

			 Dhammapada - 30
%
The monk who delights in heedfulness and looks
with fear at heedlessness advances like fire,
burning all fetters, small and large.

			 Dhammapada - 31
%
The monk who delights in heedfulness and looks
with fear at heedlessness will not fall. He is
close to Nibbana.

			 Dhammapada - 32
%
Just as a fletcher straightens an arrow shaft,
even so the discerning man straightens his mind—so
fickle and unsteady, so difficult to guard.

			 Dhammapada - 33
%
As a fish when pulled out of water and cast on
land throbs and quivers, even so is this mind
agitated. Hence should one abandon the realm of
Mara.

			 Dhammapada - 34
%
Wonderful, indeed, it is to subdue the mind, so
difficult to subdue, ever swift, and seizing
whatever it desires. A tamed mind brings
happiness.

			 Dhammapada - 35
%
Let the discerning man guard the mind, so
difficult to detect and extremely subtle, seizing
whatever it desires. A guarded mind brings
happiness.

			 Dhammapada - 36
%
Dwelling in the cave (of the heart), the mind,
without form, wanders far and alone. Those who
subdue this mind are liberated from the bonds of
Mara.

			 Dhammapada - 37
%
Wisdom never becomes perfect in one whose mind is
not steadfast, who knows not the Good Teaching and
whose faith wavers.

			 Dhammapada - 38
%
There is no fear for an awakened one, whose mind
is not sodden (by lust) nor afflicted (by hate),
and who has gone beyond both merit and demerit.

			 Dhammapada - 39
%
Realizing that this body is as fragile as a clay
pot, and fortifying this mind like a well-
fortified city, fight out Mara with the sword of
wisdom. Then, guarding the conquest, remain
unattached.

			 Dhammapada - 40
%
Ere long, alas! This body will lie upon the earth,
unheeded and lifeless, like a useless log.

			 Dhammapada - 41
%
Whatever harm an enemy may do to an enemy, or a
hater to a hater, an ill-directed mind inflicts on
oneself a greater harm.

			 Dhammapada - 42
%
Neither mother, father, nor any other relative can
do one greater good than one’s own well-directed
mind.

			 Dhammapada - 43
%
Who shall overcome this earth, this realm of Yama
and this sphere of men and gods? Who shall bring
to perfection the well-taught path of wisdom as an
expert garland-maker would his floral design?

			 Dhammapada - 44
%
A striver-on-the path shall overcome this earth,
this realm of Yama and this sphere of men and
gods. The striver-on-the-path shall bring to
perfection the well-taught path of wisdom, as an
expert garland-maker would his floral design.

			 Dhammapada - 45
%
Realizing that this body is like froth,
penetrating its mirage-like nature, and plucking
out Mara’s flower-tipped arrows of sensuality, go
beyond sight of the King of Death!

			 Dhammapada - 46
%
As a mighty flood sweeps away the sleeping
village, so death carries away the person of
distracted mind who only plucks the flowers (of
pleasure).

			 Dhammapada - 47
%
The Destroyer brings under his sway the person of
distracted mind who, insatiate in sense desires,
only plucks the flowers (of pleasure).

			 Dhammapada - 48
%
As a bee gathers honey from the flower without
injuring its color or fragrance, even so the sage
goes on his alms-round in the village.

			 Dhammapada - 49
%
Let none find fault with others; let none see the
omissions and commissions of others. But let one
see one’s own acts, done and undone.

			 Dhammapada - 50
%
Like a beautiful flower full of color but without
fragrance, even so, fruitless are the fair words
of one who does not practice them.

			 Dhammapada - 51
%
Like a beautiful flower full of color and also
fragrant, even so, fruitful are the fair words of
one who practices them.

			 Dhammapada - 52
%
As from a great heap of flowers many garlands can
be made, even so should many good deeds be done by
one born a mortal.

			 Dhammapada - 53
%
Not the sweet smell of flowers, not even the
fragrance of sandal, tagara, or jasmine blows
against the wind. But the fragrance of the
virtuous blows against the wind. Truly the
virtuous man pervades all directions with the
fragrance of his virtue.

			 Dhammapada - 54
%
Of all the fragrances—sandal, tagara, blue lotus
and jasmine—the fragrance of virtue is the
sweetest.

			 Dhammapada - 55
%
Faint is the fragrance of tagara and sandal, but
excellent is the fragrance of the virtuous,
wafting even amongst the gods.

			 Dhammapada - 56
%
Mara never finds the path of the truly virtuous,
who abide in heedfulness and are freed by perfect
knowledge.

			 Dhammapada - 57
%
Upon a heap of rubbish in the road-side ditch
blooms a lotus, fragrant and pleasing.

			 Dhammapada - 58
%
Even so, on the rubbish heap of blinded mortals
the disciple of the Supremely Enlightened One
shines resplendent in wisdom.

			 Dhammapada - 59
%
Long is the night to the sleepless; long is the
league to the weary. Long is worldly existence to
fools who know not the Sublime Truth.

			 Dhammapada - 60
%
Should a seeker not find a companion who is better
or equal, let him resolutely pursue a solitary
course; there is no fellowship with the fool.

			 Dhammapada - 61
%
The fool worries, thinking, “I have sons, I have
wealth.” Indeed, when he himself is not his own,
whence are sons, whence is wealth?

			 Dhammapada - 62
%
A fool who knows his foolishness is wise at least
to that extent, but a fool who thinks himself wise
is a fool indeed.

			 Dhammapada - 63
%
Though all his life a fool associates with a wise
man, he no more comprehends the Truth than a spoon
tastes the flavor of the soup.

			 Dhammapada - 64
%
Though only for a moment a discerning person
associates with a wise man, quickly he comprehends
the Truth, just as the tongue tastes the flavor of
the soup.

			 Dhammapada - 65
%
Fools of little wit are enemies unto themselves as
they move about doing evil deeds, the fruits of
which are bitter.

			 Dhammapada - 66
%
Ill done is that action of doing which one repents
later, and the fruit of which one, weeping, reaps
with tears.

			 Dhammapada - 67
%
Well done is that action of doing which one
repents not later, and the fruit of which one
reaps with delight and happiness.

			 Dhammapada - 68
%
So long as an evil deed has not ripened, the fool
thinks it as sweet as honey. But when the evil
deed ripens, the fool comes to grief.

			 Dhammapada - 69
%
Month after month a fool may eat his food with the
tip of a blade of grass, but he still is not worth
a sixteenth part of the those who have
comprehended the Truth.

			 Dhammapada - 70
%
Truly, an evil deed committed does not immediately
bear fruit, like milk that does not turn sour all
at once. But smoldering, it follows the fool like
fire covered by ashes.

			 Dhammapada - 71
%
To his own ruin the fool gains knowledge, for it
cleaves his head and destroys his innate goodness.

			 Dhammapada - 72
%
The fool seeks undeserved reputation, precedence
among monks, authority over monasteries, and honor
among householders.

			 Dhammapada - 73
%
“Let both laymen and monks think that it was done
by me. In every work, great and small, let them
follow me”—such is the ambition of the fool; thus
his desire and pride increase.

			 Dhammapada - 74
%
One is the quest for worldly gain, and quite
another is the path to Nibbana. Clearly
understanding this, let not the monk, the disciple
of the Buddha, be carried away by worldly acclaim,
but develop detachment instead.

			 Dhammapada - 75
%
Should one find a man who points out faults and
who reproves, let him follow such a wise and
sagacious person as one would a guide to hidden
treasure. It is always better, and never worse, to
cultivate such an association.

			 Dhammapada - 76
%
Let him admonish, instruct and shield one from
wrong; he, indeed, is dear to the good and
detestable to the evil.

			 Dhammapada - 77
%
Do not associate with evil companions; do not seek
the fellowship of the vile. Associate with the
good friends; seek the fellowship of noble men.

			 Dhammapada - 78
%
He who drinks deep the Dhamma lives happily with a
tranquil mind. The wise man ever delights in the
Dhamma made known by the Noble One (the Buddha).

			 Dhammapada - 79
%
Irrigators regulate the rivers; fletchers
straighten the arrow shaft; carpenters shape the
wood; the wise control themselves.

			 Dhammapada - 80
%
Just as a solid rock is not shaken by the storm,
even so the wise are not affected by praise or
blame.

			 Dhammapada - 81
%
On hearing the Teachings, the wise become
perfectly purified, like a lake deep, clear and
still.

			 Dhammapada - 82
%
The good renounce (attachment for) everything. The
virtuous do not prattle with a yearning for
pleasures. The wise show no elation or depression
when touched by happiness or sorrow.

			 Dhammapada - 83
%
He is indeed virtuous, wise, and righteous who
neither for his own sake nor for the sake of
another (does any wrong), who does not crave for
sons, wealth, or kingdom, and does not desire
success by unjust means.

			 Dhammapada - 84
%
Few among men are those who cross to the farther
shore. The rest, the bulk of men, only run up and
down the hither bank.

			 Dhammapada - 85
%
But those who act according to the perfectly
taught Dhamma will cross the realm of Death, so
difficult to cross.

			 Dhammapada - 86
%
SC 88Abandoning the dark way, let the wise man
cultivate the bright path. Having gone from home
to homelessness, let him yearn for that delight in
detachment, so difficult to enjoy. Giving up
sensual pleasures, with no attachment, let the
wise man cleanse himself of defilements of the
mind.

			 Dhammapada - 87
%
Those whose minds have reached full excellence in
the factors of enlightenment, who, having
renounced acquisitiveness, rejoice in not clinging
to things—rid of cankers, glowing with wisdom,
they have attained Nibbana in this very life.

			 Dhammapada - 89
%
The fever of passion exists not for him who has
completed the journey, who is sorrowless and
wholly set free, and has broken all ties.

			 Dhammapada - 90
%
The mindful ones exert themselves. They are not
attached to any home; like swans that abandon the
lake, they leave home after home behind.

			 Dhammapada - 91
%
Those who do not accumulate and are wise regarding
food, whose object is the Void, the Unconditioned
Freedom—their track cannot be traced, like that of
birds in the air.

			 Dhammapada - 92
%
He whose cankers are destroyed and who is not
attached to food, whose object is the Void, the
Unconditioned Freedom—his path cannot be traced,
like that of birds in the air.

			 Dhammapada - 93
%
Even the gods hold dear the wise one, whose senses
are subdued like horses well trained by a
charioteer, whose pride is destroyed and who is
free from the cankers.

			 Dhammapada - 94
%
There is no more worldly existence for the wise
one who, like the earth, resents nothing, who is
firm as a high pillar and as pure as a deep pool
free from mud.

			 Dhammapada - 95
%
Calm is his thought, calm his speech, and calm his
deed, who, truly knowing, is wholly freed,
perfectly tranquil and wise.

			 Dhammapada - 96
%
The man who is without blind faith, who knows the
Uncreated, who has severed all links, destroyed
all causes (for karma, good and evil), and thrown
out all desires—he, truly, is the most excellent
of men.

			 Dhammapada - 97
%
Inspiring, indeed, is that place where Arahants
dwell, be it a village, a forest, a vale, or a
hill.

			 Dhammapada - 98
%
Inspiring are the forests in which worldlings find
no pleasure. There the passionless will rejoice,
for they seek no sensual pleasures.

			 Dhammapada - 99
%
Better than a thousand useless words is one useful
word, hearing which one attains peace.

			 Dhammapada - 100
%
Better than a thousand useless verses is one
useful verse, hearing which one attains peace.

			 Dhammapada - 101
%
Better than reciting a hundred meaningless verses
is the reciting of one verse of Dhamma, hearing
which one attains peace.

			 Dhammapada - 102
%
Though one may conquer a thousand times a thousand
men in battle, yet he indeed is the noblest victor
who conquers himself.

			 Dhammapada - 103
%
SC 105Self-conquest is far better than the
conquest of others. Not even a god, an angel, Mara
or Brahma can turn into defeat the victory of a
person who is self-subdued and ever restrained in
conduct.

			 Dhammapada - 104
%
Though month after month for a hundred years one
should offer sacrifices by the thousands, yet if
only for a moment one should worship those of
perfected minds that honor is indeed better than a
century of sacrifice.

			 Dhammapada - 106
%
Though for a hundred years one should tend the
sacrificial fire in the forest, yet if only for a
moment one should worship those of perfected
minds, that worship is indeed better than a
century of sacrifice.

			 Dhammapada - 107
%
Whatever gifts and oblations one seeking merit
might offer in this world for a whole year, all
that is not worth one fourth of the merit gained
by revering the Upright Ones, which is truly
excellent.

			 Dhammapada - 108
%
To one ever eager to revere and serve the elders,
these four blessing accrue: long life and beauty,
happiness and power.

			 Dhammapada - 109
%
Better it is to live one day virtuous and
meditative than to live a hundred years immoral
and uncontrolled.

			 Dhammapada - 110
%
Better it is to live one day wise and meditative
than to live a hundred years foolish and
uncontrolled.

			 Dhammapada - 111
%
Better it is to live one day strenuous and
resolute than to live a hundred years sluggish and
dissipated.

			 Dhammapada - 112
%
Better it is to live one day seeing the rise and
fall of things than to live a hundred years
without ever seeing the rise and fall of things.

			 Dhammapada - 113
%
Better it is to live one day seeing the Deathless
than to live a hundred years without ever seeing
the Deathless.

			 Dhammapada - 114
%
Better it is to live one day seeing the Supreme
Truth than to live a hundred years without ever
seeing the Supreme Truth.

			 Dhammapada - 115
%
Hasten to do good; restrain your mind from evil.
He who is slow in doing good, his mind delights in
evil.

			 Dhammapada - 116
%
Should a person commit evil, let him not do it
again and again. Let him not find pleasure
therein, for painful is the accumulation of evil.

			 Dhammapada - 117
%
Should a person do good, let him do it again and
again. Let him find pleasure therein, for blissful
is the accumulation of good.

			 Dhammapada - 118
%
It may be well with the evil-doer as long as the
evil ripens not. But when it does ripen, then the
evil-doer sees (the painful results of) his evil
deeds.

			 Dhammapada - 119
%
It may be ill with the doer of good as long as the
good ripens not. But when it does ripen, then the
doer of good sees (the pleasant results of) his
good deeds.

			 Dhammapada - 120
%
Think not lightly of evil, saying, “It will not
come to me.” Drop by drop is the water pot filled.
Likewise, the fool, gathering it little by little,
fills himself with evil.

			 Dhammapada - 121
%
Think not lightly of good, saying, “It will not
come to me.” Drop by drop is the water pot filled.
Likewise, the wise man, gathering it little by
little, fills himself with good.

			 Dhammapada - 122
%
Just as a trader with a small escort and great
wealth would avoid a perilous route, or just as
one desiring to live avoids poison, even so should
one shun evil.

			 Dhammapada - 123
%
If on the hand there is no wound, one may carry
even poison in it. Poison does not affect one who
is free from wounds. For him who does no evil,
there is no ill.

			 Dhammapada - 124
%
Like fine dust thrown against the wind, evil falls
back upon that fool who offends an inoffensive,
pure and guiltless man.

			 Dhammapada - 125
%
Some are born in the womb; the wicked are born in
hell; the devout go to heaven; the stainless pass
into Nibbana.

			 Dhammapada - 126
%
Neither in the sky nor in mid-ocean, nor by
entering into mountain clefts, nowhere in the
world is there a place where one may escape from
the results of evil deeds.

			 Dhammapada - 127
%
Neither in the sky nor in mid-ocean, nor by
entering into mountain clefts, nowhere in the
world is there a place where one will not be
overcome by death.

			 Dhammapada - 128
%
All tremble at violence; all fear death. Putting
oneself in the place of another, one should not
kill nor cause another to kill.

			 Dhammapada - 129
%
All tremble at violence; life is dear to all.
Putting oneself in the place of another, one
should not kill nor cause another to kill.

			 Dhammapada - 130
%
One who, while himself seeking happiness,
oppresses with violence other beings who also
desire happiness, will not attain happiness
hereafter.

			 Dhammapada - 131
%
One who, while himself seeking happiness, does not
oppress with violence other beings who also desire
happiness, will find happiness hereafter.

			 Dhammapada - 132
%
Speak not harshly to anyone, for those thus spoken
to might retort. Indeed, angry speech hurts, and
retaliation may overtake you.

			 Dhammapada - 133
%
If, like a broken gong, you silence yourself, you
have approached Nibbana, for vindictiveness is no
longer in you.

			 Dhammapada - 134
%
Just as a cowherd drives the cattle to pasture
with a staff, so do old age and death drive the
life force of beings (from existence to
existence).

			 Dhammapada - 135
%
When the fool commits evil deeds, he does not
realize (their evil nature). The witless man is
tormented by his own deeds, like one burnt by
fire.

			 Dhammapada - 136
%
He who inflicts violence on those who are unarmed,
and offends those who are inoffensive, will soon
come upon one of these ten states:

			 Dhammapada - 137
%
SC 139SC 140Sharp pain, or disaster, bodily
injury, serious illness, or derangement of mind,
trouble from the government, or grave charges,
loss of relatives, or loss of wealth, or houses
destroyed by ravaging fire; upon dissolution of
the body that ignorant man is born in hell.

			 Dhammapada - 138
%
Neither going about naked, nor matted locks, nor
filth, nor fasting, nor lying on the ground, nor
smearing oneself with ashes and dust, nor sitting
on the heels (in penance) can purify a mortal who
has not overcome doubt.

			 Dhammapada - 141
%
Even though he be well-attired, yet if he is
poised, calm, controlled and established in the
holy life, having set aside violence towards all
beings—he, truly, is a holy man, a renunciate, a
monk.

			 Dhammapada - 142
%
Only rarely is there a man in this world who,
restrained by modesty, avoids reproach, as a
thoroughbred horse avoids the whip.

			 Dhammapada - 143
%
Like a thoroughbred horse touched by the whip, be
strenuous, be filled with spiritual yearning. By
faith and moral purity, by effort and meditation,
by investigation of the truth, by being rich in
knowledge and virtue, and by being mindful,
destroy this unlimited suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 144
%
Irrigators regulate the waters, fletchers
straighten arrow shafts, carpenters shape wood,
and the good control themselves.

			 Dhammapada - 145
%
When this world is ever ablaze, why this laughter,
why this jubilation? Shrouded in darkness, will
you not see the light?

			 Dhammapada - 146
%
Behold this body—a painted image, a mass of heaped
up sores, infirm, full of hankering—of which
nothing is lasting or stable!

			 Dhammapada - 147
%
Fully worn out is this body, a nest of disease,
and fragile. This foul mass breaks up, for death
is the end of life.

			 Dhammapada - 148
%
These dove-colored bones are like gourds that lie
scattered about in autumn. Having seen them, how
can one seek delight?

			 Dhammapada - 149
%
This city (body) is built of bones, plastered with
flesh and blood; within are decay and death, pride
and jealousy.

			 Dhammapada - 150
%
Even gorgeous royal chariots wear out, and indeed
this body too wears out. But the Dhamma of the
Good does not age; thus the Good make it known to
the good.

			 Dhammapada - 151
%
The man of little learning grows old like a bull.
He grows only in bulk, but, his wisdom does not
grow.

			 Dhammapada - 152
%
Through many a birth in samsara have I wandered in
vain, seeking the builder of this house (of life).
Repeated birth is indeed suffering!

			 Dhammapada - 153
%
O house-builder, you are seen! You will not build
this house again. For your rafters are broken and
your ridgepole shattered. My mind has reached the
Unconditioned; I have attained the destruction of
craving.

			 Dhammapada - 154
%
Those who in youth have not led the holy life, or
have failed to acquire wealth, languish like old
cranes in the pond without fish.

			 Dhammapada - 155
%
Those who in youth have not lead the holy life, or
have failed to acquire wealth, lie sighing over
the past, like worn out arrows (shot from) a bow.

			 Dhammapada - 156
%
If one holds oneself dear, one should diligently
watch oneself. Let the wise man keep vigil during
any of the three watches of the night.

			 Dhammapada - 157
%
One should first establish oneself in what is
proper; then only should one instruct others. Thus
the wise man will not be reproached.

			 Dhammapada - 158
%
One should do what one teaches others to do; if
one would train others, one should be well
controlled oneself. Difficult, indeed, is self-
control.

			 Dhammapada - 159
%
One truly is the protector of oneself; who else
could the protector be? With oneself fully
controlled, one gains a mastery that is hard to
gain.

			 Dhammapada - 160
%
The evil a witless man does by himself, born of
himself and produced by himself, grinds him as a
diamond grinds a hard gem.

			 Dhammapada - 161
%
Just as a single creeper strangles the tree on
which it grows, even so, a man who is exceedingly
depraved harms himself as only an enemy might
wish.

			 Dhammapada - 162
%
Easy to do are things that are bad and harmful to
oneself. But exceedingly difficult to do are
things that are good and beneficial.

			 Dhammapada - 163
%
Whoever, on account of perverted views, scorns the
Teaching of the Perfected Ones, the Noble and
Righteous Ones—that fool, like the bamboo,
produces fruits only for self destruction.

			 Dhammapada - 164
%
By oneself is evil done; by oneself is one
defiled. By oneself is evil left undone; by
oneself is one made pure. Purity and impurity
depend on oneself; no one can purify another.

			 Dhammapada - 165
%
Let one not neglect one’s own welfare for the sake
of another, however great. Clearly understanding
one’s own welfare, let one be intent upon the
good.

			 Dhammapada - 166
%
Follow not the vulgar way; live not in
heedlessness; hold not false views; linger not
long in worldly existence.

			 Dhammapada - 167
%
Arise! Do not be heedless! Lead a righteous life.
The righteous live happily both in this world and
the next.

			 Dhammapada - 168
%
Lead a righteous life; lead not a base life. The
righteous live happily both in this world and the
next.

			 Dhammapada - 169
%
One who looks upon the world as a bubble and a
mirage, him the King of Death sees not.

			 Dhammapada - 170
%
Come! Behold this world, which is like a decorated
royal chariot. Here fools flounder, but the wise
have no attachment to it.

			 Dhammapada - 171
%
He who having been heedless is heedless no more,
illuminates this world like the moon freed from
clouds.

			 Dhammapada - 172
%
He, who by good deeds covers the evil he has done,
illuminates this world like the moon freed from
clouds.

			 Dhammapada - 173
%
Blind is the world; here only a few possess
insight. Only a few, like birds escaping from the
net, go to realms of bliss.

			 Dhammapada - 174
%
Swans fly on the path of the sun; men pass through
the air by psychic powers; the wise are led away
from the world after vanquishing Mara and his
host.

			 Dhammapada - 175
%
For a liar who has violated the one law (of
truthfulness) who holds in scorn the hereafter,
there is no evil that he cannot do.

			 Dhammapada - 176
%
Truly, misers fare not to heavenly realms; nor,
indeed, do fools praise generosity. But the wise
man rejoices in giving, and by that alone does he
become happy hereafter.

			 Dhammapada - 177
%
Better than sole sovereignty over the earth,
better than going to heaven, better even than
lordship over all the worlds is the supramundane
Fruition of Stream Entrance.

			 Dhammapada - 178
%
By what track can you trace that trackless Buddha
of limitless range, whose victory nothing can
undo, whom none of the vanquished defilements can
ever pursue?

			 Dhammapada - 179
%
By what track can you trace that trackless Buddha
of limitless range, in whom exists no longer, the
entangling and embroiling craving that perpetuates
becoming?

			 Dhammapada - 180
%
Those wise ones who are devoted to meditation and
who delight in the calm of renunciation—such
mindful ones, Supreme Buddhas, even the gods hold
dear.

			 Dhammapada - 181
%
Hard is it to be born a man; hard is the life of
mortals. Hard is it to gain the opportunity of
hearing the Sublime Truth, and hard to encounter
is the arising of the Buddhas.

			 Dhammapada - 182
%
To avoid all evil, to cultivate good, and to
cleanse one’s mind—this is the teaching of the
Buddhas.

			 Dhammapada - 183
%
Enduring patience is the highest austerity.
“Nibbana is supreme,” say the Buddhas. He is not a
true monk who harms another, nor a true renunciate
who oppresses others.

			 Dhammapada - 184
%
Not despising, not harming, restraint according to
the code of monastic discipline, moderation in
food, dwelling in solitude, devotion to
meditation—this is the teaching of the Buddhas.

			 Dhammapada - 185
%
SC 187There is no satisfying sensual desires, even
with the rain of gold coins. For sensual pleasures
give little satisfaction and much pain. Having
understood this, the wise man finds no delight
even in heavenly pleasures. The disciple of the
Supreme Buddha delights in the destruction of
craving.

			 Dhammapada - 186
%
Driven only by fear, do men go for refuge to many
places—to hills, woods, groves, trees and shrines.

			 Dhammapada - 188
%
Such, indeed, is no safe refuge; such is not the
refuge supreme. Not by resorting to such a refuge
is one released from all suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 189
%
SC 191He who has gone for refuge to the Buddha,
the Teaching and his Order, penetrates with
transcendental wisdom the Four Noble
Truths—suffering, the cause of suffering, the
cessation of suffering, and the Noble Eightfold
Path leading to the cessation of suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 190
%
This indeed is the safe refuge, this the refuge
supreme. Having gone to such a refuge, one is
released from all suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 192
%
Hard to find is the thoroughbred man (the Buddha);
he is not born everywhere. Where such a wise man
is born, that clan thrives happily.

			 Dhammapada - 193
%
Blessed is the birth of the Buddhas; blessed is
the enunciation of the sacred Teaching; blessed is
the harmony in the Order, and blessed is the
spiritual pursuit of the united truth-seeker.

			 Dhammapada - 194
%
SC 196He who reveres those worthy of reverence,
the Buddhas and their disciples, who have
transcended all obstacles and passed beyond the
reach of sorrow and lamentation—he who reveres
such peaceful and fearless ones, his merit none
can compute by any measure.

			 Dhammapada - 195
%
Happy indeed we live, friendly amidst the hostile.
Amidst hostile men we dwell free from hatred.

			 Dhammapada - 197
%
Happy indeed we live, friendly amidst the
afflicted (by craving). Amidst afflicted men we
dwell free from affliction.

			 Dhammapada - 198
%
Happy indeed we live, free from avarice amidst the
avaricious. Amidst the avaricious men we dwell
free from avarice.

			 Dhammapada - 199
%
Happy indeed we live, we who possess nothing.
Feeders on joy we shall be, like the Radiant Gods.

			 Dhammapada - 200
%
Victory begets enmity; the defeated dwell in pain.
Happily the peaceful live, discarding both victory
and defeat.

			 Dhammapada - 201
%
There is no fire like lust and no crime like
hatred. There is no ill like the aggregates (of
existence) and no bliss higher than the peace (of
Nibbana).

			 Dhammapada - 202
%
Hunger is the worst disease, conditioned things
the worst suffering. Knowing this as it really is,
the wise realize Nibbana, the highest bliss.

			 Dhammapada - 203
%
Health is the most precious gain and contentment
the greatest wealth. A trustworthy person is the
best kinsman, Nibbana the highest bliss.

			 Dhammapada - 204
%
Having savored the taste of solitude and peace (of
Nibbana), pain-free and stainless he becomes,
drinking deep the taste of the bliss of the Truth.

			 Dhammapada - 205
%
Good is it to see the Noble Ones; to live with
them is ever blissful. One will always be happy by
not encountering fools.

			 Dhammapada - 206
%
Indeed, he who moves in the company of fools
grieves for longing. Association with fools is
ever painful, like partnership with an enemy. But
association with the wise is happy, like meeting
one’s own kinsmen.

			 Dhammapada - 207
%
Therefore, follow the Noble One, who is steadfast,
wise, learned, dutiful and devout. One should
follow only such a man, who is truly good and
discerning, even as the moon follows the path of
the stars.

			 Dhammapada - 208
%
Giving himself to things to be shunned and not
exerting where exertion is needed, a seeker after
pleasures, having given up his true welfare,
envies those intent upon theirs.

			 Dhammapada - 209
%
Seek no intimacy with the beloved and also not
with the unloved, for not to see the beloved and
to see the unloved, both are painful.

			 Dhammapada - 210
%
Therefore hold nothing dear, for separation from
the dear is painful. There are no bonds for those
who have nothing beloved or unloved.

			 Dhammapada - 211
%
From endearment springs grief, from endearment
springs fear. For one who is wholly free from
endearment there is no grief, whence then fear?

			 Dhammapada - 212
%
From affection springs grief, from affection
springs fear. For one who is wholly free from
affection there is no grief, whence then fear?

			 Dhammapada - 213
%
From attachment springs grief, from attachment
springs fear. For one who is wholly free from
attachment there is no grief, whence then fear?

			 Dhammapada - 214
%
From lust springs grief, from lust springs fear.
For one who is wholly free from craving there is
no grief; whence then fear?

			 Dhammapada - 215
%
From craving springs grief, from craving springs
fear. For one who is wholly free from craving
there is no grief; whence then fear?

			 Dhammapada - 216
%
People hold dear him who embodies virtue and
insight, who is principled, has realized the
truth, and who himself does what he ought to be
doing.

			 Dhammapada - 217
%
One who is intent upon the Ineffable (Nibbana),
dwells with mind inspired (by supramundane
wisdom), and is no more bound by sense
pleasures—such a man is called “One Bound
Upstream.”

			 Dhammapada - 218
%
When, after a long absence, a man safely returns
from afar, his relatives, friends and well-wishers
welcome him home on arrival.

			 Dhammapada - 219
%
As kinsmen welcome a dear one on arrival, even so
his own good deeds will welcome the doer of good
who has gone from this world to the next.

			 Dhammapada - 220
%
One should give up anger, renounce pride, and
overcome all fetters. Suffering never befalls him
who clings not to mind and body and is detached.

			 Dhammapada - 221
%
He who checks rising anger as a charioteer checks
a rolling chariot, him I call a true charioteer.
Others only hold the reins.

			 Dhammapada - 222
%
Overcome the angry by non-anger; overcome the
wicked by goodness; overcome the miser by
generosity; overcome the liar by truth.

			 Dhammapada - 223
%
Speak the truth; yield not to anger; when asked,
give even if you only have a little. By these
three means can one reach the presence of the
gods.

			 Dhammapada - 224
%
Those sages who are inoffensive and ever
restrained in body, go to the Deathless State,
where, having gone, they grieve no more.

			 Dhammapada - 225
%
Those who are ever vigilant, who discipline
themselves day and night, and are ever intent upon
Nibbana—their defilements fade away.

			 Dhammapada - 226
%
O Atula! Indeed, this is an ancient practice, not
one only of today: they blame those who remain
silent, they blame those who speak much, they
blame those who speak in moderation. There is none
in the world who is not blamed.

			 Dhammapada - 227
%
There never was, there never will be, nor is there
now, a person who is wholly blamed or wholly
praised.

			 Dhammapada - 228
%
But the man whom the wise praise, after observing
him day after day, is one of flawless character,
wise, and endowed with knowledge and virtue.

			 Dhammapada - 229
%
Who can blame such a one, as worthy as a coin of
refined gold? Even the gods praise him; by Brahma,
too, is he praised.

			 Dhammapada - 230
%
Let a man guard himself against irritability in
bodily action; let him be controlled in deed.
Abandoning bodily misconduct, let him practice
good conduct in deed.

			 Dhammapada - 231
%
Let a man guard himself against irritability in
speech; let him be controlled in speech.
Abandoning verbal misconduct, let him practice
good conduct in speech.

			 Dhammapada - 232
%
Let a man guard himself against irritability in
thought; let him be controlled in mind. Abandoning
mental misconduct, let him practice good conduct
in thought.

			 Dhammapada - 233
%
The wise are controlled in bodily action,
controlled in speech and controlled in thought.
They are truly well-controlled.

			 Dhammapada - 234
%
Like a withered leaf are you now; death’s
messengers await you. You stand on the eve of your
departure, yet you have made no provision for your
journey!

			 Dhammapada - 235
%
Make an island for yourself! Strive hard and
become wise! Rid of impurities and cleansed of
stain, you shall enter the celestial abode of the
Noble Ones.

			 Dhammapada - 236
%
Your life has come to an end now; You are setting
forth into the presence of Yama, the king of
death. No resting place is there for you on the
way, yet you have made no provision for the
journey!

			 Dhammapada - 237
%
Make an island unto yourself! Strive hard and
become wise! Rid of impurities and cleansed of
stain, you shall not come again to birth and
decay.

			 Dhammapada - 238
%
One by one, little by little, moment by moment, a
wise man should remove his own impurities, as a
smith removes his dross from silver.

			 Dhammapada - 239
%
Just as rust arising from iron eats away the base
from which it arises, even so, their own deeds
lead transgressors to states of woe.

			 Dhammapada - 240
%
Non-repetition is the bane of scriptures; neglect
is the bane of a home; slovenliness is the bane of
personal appearance, and heedlessness is the bane
of a guard.

			 Dhammapada - 241
%
Unchastity is the taint in a woman; niggardliness
is the taint in a giver. Taints, indeed, are all
evil things, both in this world and the next.

			 Dhammapada - 242
%
A worse taint than these is ignorance, the worst
of all taints. Destroy this one taint and become
taintless, O monks!

			 Dhammapada - 243
%
Easy is life for the shameless one who is impudent
as a crow, is backbiting and forward, arrogant and
corrupt.

			 Dhammapada - 244
%
Difficult is life for the modest one who always
seeks purity, is detached and unassuming, clean in
life, and discerning.

			 Dhammapada - 245
%
SC 247One who destroys life, utters lies, takes
what is not given, goes to another man’s wife, and
is addicted to intoxicating drinks—such a man digs
up his own root even in this world.

			 Dhammapada - 246
%
Know this, O good man: evil things are difficult
to control. Let not greed and wickedness drag you
to protracted misery.

			 Dhammapada - 248
%
People give according to their faith or regard. If
one becomes discontented with the food and drink
given by others, one does not attain meditative
absorption, either by day or by night.

			 Dhammapada - 249
%
But he in who this (discontent) is fully
destroyed, uprooted and extinct, he attains
absorption, both by day and by night.

			 Dhammapada - 250
%
There is no fire like lust; there is no grip like
hatred; there is no net like delusion; there is no
river like craving.

			 Dhammapada - 251
%
Easily seen is the fault of others, but one’s own
fault is difficult to see. Like chaff one winnows
another’s faults, but hides one’s own, even as a
crafty fowler hides behind sham branches.

			 Dhammapada - 252
%
He who seeks another’s faults, who is ever
censorious—his cankers grow. He is far from
destruction of the cankers.

			 Dhammapada - 253
%
There is no track in the sky, and no recluse
outside (the Buddha’s dispensation). Mankind
delights in worldliness, but the Buddhas are free
from worldliness.

			 Dhammapada - 254
%
There is no track in the sky, and no recluse
outside (the Buddha’s dispensation). There are no
conditioned things that are eternal, and no
instability in the Buddhas.

			 Dhammapada - 255
%
Not by passing arbitrary judgments does a man
become just; a wise man is he who investigates
both right and wrong.

			 Dhammapada - 256
%
He who does not judge others arbitrarily, but
passes judgment impartially according to the
truth, that sagacious man is a guardian of law and
is called just.

			 Dhammapada - 257
%
One is not wise because one speaks much. He who is
peaceable, friendly and fearless is called wise.

			 Dhammapada - 258
%
A man is not versed in Dhamma because he speaks
much. He who, after hearing a little Dhamma,
realizes its truth directly and is not heedless of
it, is truly versed in the Dhamma.

			 Dhammapada - 259
%
A monk is not an elder because his head is gray.
He is but ripe in age, and he is called one grown
old in vain.

			 Dhammapada - 260
%
One in whom there is truthfulness, virtue,
inoffensiveness, restraint and self-mastery, who
is free from defilements and is wise—he is truly
called an Elder.

			 Dhammapada - 261
%
Not by mere eloquence nor by beauty of form does a
man become accomplished, if he is jealous, selfish
and deceitful.

			 Dhammapada - 262
%
But he in whom these are wholly destroyed,
uprooted and extinct, and who has cast out
hatred—that wise man is truly accomplished.

			 Dhammapada - 263
%
Not by shaven head does a man who is indisciplined
and untruthful become a monk. How can he who is
full of desire and greed be a monk?

			 Dhammapada - 264
%
He who wholly subdues evil both small and great is
called a monk, because he has overcome all evil.

			 Dhammapada - 265
%
He is not a monk just because he lives on others’
alms. Not by adopting outward form does one become
a true monk.

			 Dhammapada - 266
%
Whoever here (in the Dispensation) lives a holy
life, transcending both merit and demerit, and
walks with understanding in this world—he is truly
called a monk.

			 Dhammapada - 267
%
Not by observing silence does one become a sage,
if he be foolish and ignorant. But that man is
wise who, as if holding a balance-scale accepts
only the good.

			 Dhammapada - 268
%
The sage (thus) rejecting the evil, is truly a
sage. Since he comprehends both (present and
future) worlds, he is called a sage.

			 Dhammapada - 269
%
He is not noble who injures living beings. He is
called noble because he is harmless towards all
living beings.

			 Dhammapada - 270
%
SC 272Not by rules and observances, not even by
much learning, nor by gain of absorption, nor by a
life of seclusion, nor by thinking, “I enjoy the
bliss of renunciation, which is not experienced by
the worldling” should you, O monks, rest content,
until the utter destruction of cankers
(Arahantship) is reached.

			 Dhammapada - 271
%
Of all the paths the Eightfold Path is the best;
of all the truths the Four Noble Truths are the
best; of all things passionlessness is the best:
of men the Seeing One (the Buddha) is the best.

			 Dhammapada - 273
%
This is the only path; there is none other for the
purification of insight. Tread this path, and you
will bewilder Mara.

			 Dhammapada - 274
%
Walking upon this path you will make an end of
suffering. Having discovered how to pull out the
thorn of lust, I make known the path.

			 Dhammapada - 275
%
You yourselves must strive; the Buddhas only point
the way. Those meditative ones who tread the path
are released from the bonds of Mara.

			 Dhammapada - 276
%
“All conditioned things are impermanent”—when one
sees this with wisdom, one turns away from
suffering. This is the path to purification.

			 Dhammapada - 277
%
“All conditioned things are unsatisfactory”—when
one sees this with wisdom, one turns away from
suffering. This is the path to purification.

			 Dhammapada - 278
%
“All things are not-self”—when one sees this with
wisdom, one turns away from suffering. This is the
path to purification.

			 Dhammapada - 279
%
The idler who does not exert himself when he
should, who though young and strong is full of
sloth, with a mind full of vain thoughts—such an
indolent man does not find the path to wisdom.

			 Dhammapada - 280
%
Let a man be watchful of speech, well controlled
in mind, and not commit evil in bodily action. Let
him purify these three courses of action, and win
the path made known by the Great Sage.

			 Dhammapada - 281
%
Wisdom springs from meditation; without meditation
wisdom wanes. Having known these two paths of
progress and decline, let a man so conduct himself
that his wisdom may increase.

			 Dhammapada - 282
%
Cut down the forest (lust), but not the tree; from
the forest springs fear. Having cut down the
forest and the underbrush (desire), be
passionless, O monks!

			 Dhammapada - 283
%
For so long as the underbrush of desire, even the
most subtle, of a man towards a woman is not cut
down, his mind is in bondage, like the sucking
calf to its mother.

			 Dhammapada - 284
%
Cut off your affection in the manner of a man who
plucks with his hand an autumn lotus. Cultivate
only the path to peace, Nibbana, as made known by
the Exalted One.

			 Dhammapada - 285
%
“Here shall I live during the rains, here in
winter and summer”—thus thinks the fool. He does
not realize the danger (that death might
intervene).

			 Dhammapada - 286
%
As a great flood carries away a sleeping village,
so death seizes and carries away the man with a
clinging mind, doting on his children and cattle.

			 Dhammapada - 287
%
For him who is assailed by death there is no
protection by kinsmen. None there are to save
him—no sons, nor father, nor relatives.

			 Dhammapada - 288
%
Realizing this fact, let the wise man, restrained
by morality, hasten to clear the path leading to
Nibbana.

			 Dhammapada - 289
%
If by renouncing a lesser happiness one may
realize a greater happiness, let the wise man
renounce the lesser, having regard for the
greater.

			 Dhammapada - 290
%
Entangled by the bonds of hate, he who seeks his
own happiness by inflicting pain on others, is
never delivered from hatred.

			 Dhammapada - 291
%
The cankers only increase for those who are
arrogant and heedless, who leave undone what
should be done and do what should not be done.

			 Dhammapada - 292
%
The cankers cease for those mindful and clearly
comprehending ones who always earnestly practice
mindfulness of the body, who do not resort to what
should not be done, and steadfastly pursue what
should be done.

			 Dhammapada - 293
%
Having slain mother (craving), father (self-
conceit), two warrior-kings (eternalism and
nihilism), and destroyed a country (sense organs
and sense objects) together with its treasurer
(attachment and lust), ungrieving goes the holy
man.

			 Dhammapada - 294
%
Having slain mother, father, two brahman kings
(two extreme views), and a tiger as the fifth (the
five mental hindrances), ungrieving goes the holy
man.

			 Dhammapada - 295
%
Those disciples of Gotama ever awaken happily who
day and night constantly practice the Recollection
of the Qualities of the Buddha.

			 Dhammapada - 296
%
Those disciples of Gotama ever awaken happily who
day and night constantly practice the Recollection
of the Qualities of the Dhamma.

			 Dhammapada - 297
%
Those disciples of Gotama ever awaken happily who
day and night constantly practice the Recollection
of the Qualities of the Sangha.

			 Dhammapada - 298
%
Those disciples of Gotama ever awaken happily who
day and night constantly practice Mindfulness of
the Body.

			 Dhammapada - 299
%
Those disciples of Gotama ever awaken happily
whose minds by day and night delight in the
practice of non-violence.

			 Dhammapada - 300
%
Those disciples of Gotama ever awaken happily
whose minds by day and night delight in the
practice of meditation.

			 Dhammapada - 301
%
Difficult is life as a monk; difficult is it to
delight therein. Also difficult and sorrowful is
the household life. Suffering comes from
association with unequals; suffering comes from
wandering in samsara. Therefore, be not an aimless
wanderer, be not a pursuer of suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 302
%
He who is full of faith and virtue, and possesses
good repute and wealth—he is respected everywhere,
in whatever land he travels.

			 Dhammapada - 303
%
The good shine from afar, like the Himalaya
mountains. But the wicked are unseen, like arrows
shot in the night.

			 Dhammapada - 304
%
He who sits alone, sleeps alone, and walks alone,
who is strenuous and subdues himself alone, will
find delight in the solitude of the forest.

			 Dhammapada - 305
%
The liar goes to the state of woe; also he who,
having done (wrong), says, “I did not do it.” Men
of base actions both, on departing they share the
same destiny in the other world.

			 Dhammapada - 306
%
There are many evil characters and uncontrolled
men wearing the saffron robe. These wicked men
will be born in states of woe because of their
evil deeds.

			 Dhammapada - 307
%
It would be better to swallow a red-hot iron ball,
blazing like fire, than as an immoral and
uncontrolled monk to eat the alms of the people.

			 Dhammapada - 308
%
Four misfortunes befall the reckless man who
consorts with another’s wife: acquisition of
demerit, disturbed sleep, ill-repute, and (rebirth
in) states of woe.

			 Dhammapada - 309
%
Such a man acquires demerit and an unhappy birth
in the future. Brief is the pleasure of the
frightened man and woman, and the king imposes
heavy punishment. Hence, let no man consort with
another’s wife.

			 Dhammapada - 310
%
Just as kusa grass wrongly handled cuts the hand,
even so, a recluse’s life wrongly lived drags one
to states of woe.

			 Dhammapada - 311
%
Any loose act, any corrupt observance, any life of
questionable celibacy—none of these bear much
fruit.

			 Dhammapada - 312
%
If anything is to be done, let one do it with
sustained vigor. A lax monastic life stirs up the
dust of passions all the more.

			 Dhammapada - 313
%
An evil deed is better left undone, for such a
deed torments one afterwards. But a good deed is
better done, doing which one repents not later.

			 Dhammapada - 314
%
Just as a border city is closely guarded both
within and without, even so, guard yourself. Do
not let slip this opportunity (for spiritual
growth). For those who let slip this opportunity
grieve indeed when consigned to hell.

			 Dhammapada - 315
%
Those who are ashamed of what they should not be
ashamed of, and are not ashamed of what they
should be ashamed of—upholding false views, they
go to states of woe.

			 Dhammapada - 316
%
Those who see something to fear where there is
nothing to fear, and see nothing to fear where
there is something to fear—upholding false views,
they go to states of woe.

			 Dhammapada - 317
%
Those who imagine evil where there is none, and do
not see evil where it is—upholding false views,
they go to states of woe.

			 Dhammapada - 318
%
Those who discern the wrong as wrong and the right
as right—upholding right views, they go to realms
of bliss.

			 Dhammapada - 319
%
As an elephant in the battlefield withstands
arrows shot from bows all around, even so shall I
endure abuse. There are many, indeed, who lack
virtue.

			 Dhammapada - 320
%
A tamed elephant is led into a crowd, and the king
mounts a tamed elephant. Best among men is the
subdued one who endures abuse.

			 Dhammapada - 321
%
Excellent are well-trained mules, thoroughbred
Sindhu horses and noble tusker elephants. But
better still is the man who has subdued himself.

			 Dhammapada - 322
%
Not by these mounts, however, would one go to the
Untrodden Land (Nibbana), as one who is self-tamed
goes by his own tamed and well-controlled mind.

			 Dhammapada - 323
%
Musty during rut, the tusker named Dhanapalaka is
uncontrollable. Held in captivity, the tusker does
not touch a morsel, but only longingly calls to
mind the elephant forest.

			 Dhammapada - 324
%
When a man is sluggish and gluttonous, sleeping
and rolling around in bed like a fat domestic pig,
that sluggard undergoes rebirth again and again.

			 Dhammapada - 325
%
Formerly this mind wandered about as it liked,
where it wished and according to its pleasure, but
now I shall thoroughly master it with wisdom as a
mahout controls with his ankus an elephant in rut.

			 Dhammapada - 326
%
Delight in heedfulness! Guard well your thoughts!
Draw yourself out of this bog of evil, even as an
elephant draws himself out of the mud.

			 Dhammapada - 327
%
If for company you find a wise and prudent friend
who leads a good life, you should, overcoming all
impediments, keep his company joyously and
mindfully.

			 Dhammapada - 328
%
If for company you cannot find a wise and prudent
friend who leads a good life, then, like a king
who leaves behind a conquered kingdom, or like a
lone elephant in the elephant forest, you should
go your way alone.

			 Dhammapada - 329
%
Better it is to live alone; there is no fellowship
with a fool. Live alone and do no evil; be
carefree like an elephant in the elephant forest.

			 Dhammapada - 330
%
Good are friends when need arises; good is
contentment with just what one has; good is merit
when life is at an end, and good is the abandoning
of all suffering (through Arahantship).

			 Dhammapada - 331
%
In this world, good it is to serve one’s mother,
good it is to serve one’s father, good it is to
serve the monks, and good it is to serve the holy
men.

			 Dhammapada - 332
%
Good is virtue until life’s end, good is faith
that is steadfast, good is the acquisition of
wisdom, and good is the avoidance of evil.

			 Dhammapada - 333
%
The craving of one given to heedless living grows
like a creeper. Like the monkey seeking fruits in
the forest, he leaps from life to life (tasting
the fruit of his kamma).

			 Dhammapada - 334
%
Whoever is overcome by this wretched and sticky
craving, his sorrows grow like grass after the
rains.

			 Dhammapada - 335
%
But whoever overcomes this wretched craving, so
difficult to overcome, from him sorrows fall away
like water from a lotus leaf.

			 Dhammapada - 336
%
This I say to you: Good luck to all assembled
here! Dig up the root of craving, like one in
search of the fragrant root of the birana grass.
Let not Mara crush you again and again, as a flood
crushes a reed.

			 Dhammapada - 337
%
Just as a tree, though cut down, sprouts up again
if its roots remain uncut and firm, even so, until
the craving that lies dormant is rooted out,
suffering springs up again and again.

			 Dhammapada - 338
%
The misguided man in whom the thirty-six currents
of craving strongly rush toward pleasurable
objects, is swept away by the flood of his
passionate thoughts.

			 Dhammapada - 339
%
Everywhere these currents flow, and the creeper
(of craving) sprouts and grows. Seeing that the
creeper has sprung up, cut off its root with
wisdom.

			 Dhammapada - 340
%
Flowing in (from all objects) and watered by
craving, feelings of pleasure arise in beings.
Bent on pleasures and seeking enjoyment, these men
fall prey to birth and decay.

			 Dhammapada - 341
%
Beset by craving, people run about like an
entrapped hare. Held fast by mental fetters, they
come to suffering again and again for a long time.

			 Dhammapada - 342
%
Beset by craving, people run about like an
entrapped hare. Therefore, one who yearns to be
passion-free should destroy his own craving.

			 Dhammapada - 343
%
There is one who, turning away from desire (for
household life) takes to the life of the forest
(i.e. Of a monk). But after being freed from the
household, he runs back to it. Behold that man!
Though freed, he runs back to that very bondage!

			 Dhammapada - 344
%
SC 346That is not a strong fetter, the wise say,
which is made of iron, wood or hemp. But the
infatuation and longing for jewels and ornaments,
children and wives—that, they say, is a far
stronger fetter, which pulls one downward and,
though seemingly loose, is hard to remove. This,
too, the wise cut off. Giving up sensual pleasure,
and without any longing, they renounce the world.

			 Dhammapada - 345
%
Those who are lust-infatuated fall back into the
swirling current (of samsara) like a spider on its
self-spun web. This, too, the wise cut off.
Without any longing, they abandon all suffering
and renounce the world.

			 Dhammapada - 347
%
Let go of the past, let go of the future, let go
of the present, and cross over to the farther
shore of existence. With mind wholly liberated,
you shall come no more to birth and death.

			 Dhammapada - 348
%
For a person tormented by evil thoughts, who is
passion-dominated and given to the pursuit of
pleasure, his craving steadily grows. He makes the
fetter strong, indeed.

			 Dhammapada - 349
%
He who delights in subduing evil thoughts, who
meditates on the impurities and is ever mindful—it
is he who will make an end of craving and rend
asunder Mara’s fetter.

			 Dhammapada - 350
%
He who has reached the goal, is fearless, free
from craving, passionless, and has plucked out the
thorns of existence—for him this is the last body.

			 Dhammapada - 351
%
He who is free from craving and attachment, is
perfect in uncovering the true meaning of the
Teaching, and knows the arrangement of the sacred
texts in correct sequence—he, indeed, is the
bearer of his final body. He is truly called the
profoundly wise one, the great man.

			 Dhammapada - 352
%
A victor am I over all, all have I known. Yet
unattached am I to all that is conquered and
known. Abandoning all, I am freed through the
destruction of craving. Having thus directly
comprehended all by myself, whom shall I call my
teacher?

			 Dhammapada - 353
%
The gift of Dhamma excels all gifts; the taste of
the Dhamma excels all tastes; the delight in
Dhamma excels all delights. The Craving-Freed
vanquishes all suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 354
%
Riches ruin only the foolish, not those in quest
of the Beyond. By craving for riches the witless
man ruins himself as well as others.

			 Dhammapada - 355
%
Weeds are the bane of fields, lust is the bane of
mankind. Therefore, what is offered to those free
of lust yields abundant fruit.

			 Dhammapada - 356
%
Weeds are the bane of fields, hatred is the bane
of mankind. Therefore, what is offered to those
free of hatred yields abundant fruit.

			 Dhammapada - 357
%
Weeds are the bane of fields, delusion is the bane
of mankind. Therefore, what is offered to those
free of delusion yields abundant fruit.

			 Dhammapada - 358
%
Weeds are the bane of fields, desire is the bane
of mankind. Therefore, what is offered to those
free of desire yields abundant fruit.

			 Dhammapada - 359
%
Good is restraint over the eye; good is restraint
over the ear; good is restraint over the nose;
good is restraint over the tongue.

			 Dhammapada - 360
%
Good is restraint in the body; good is restraint
in speech; good is restraint in thought. Restraint
everywhere is good. The monk restrained in every
way is freed from all suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 361
%
He who has control over his hands, feet and
tongue; who is fully controlled, delights in
inward development, is absorbed in meditation,
keeps to himself and is contented—him do people
call a monk.

			 Dhammapada - 362
%
That monk who has control over his tongue, is
moderate in speech, unassuming and who explains
the Teaching in both letter and spirit—whatever he
says is pleasing.

			 Dhammapada - 363
%
The monk who abides in the Dhamma, delights in the
Dhamma, meditates on the Dhamma, and bears the
Dhamma well in mind—he does not fall away from the
sublime Dhamma.

			 Dhammapada - 364
%
One should not despise what one has received, nor
envy the gains of others. The monk who envies the
gains of others does not attain to meditative
absorption.

			 Dhammapada - 365
%
A monk who does not despise what he has received,
even though it be little, who is pure in
livelihood and unremitting in effort—him even the
gods praise.

			 Dhammapada - 366
%
He who has no attachment whatsoever for the mind
and body, who does not grieve for what he has
not—he is truly called a monk.

			 Dhammapada - 367
%
The monk who abides in universal love and is
deeply devoted to the Teaching of the Buddha
attains the peace of Nibbana, the bliss of the
cessation of all conditioned things.

			 Dhammapada - 368
%
Empty this boat, O monk! Emptied, it will sail
lightly. Rid of lust and hatred, you shall reach
Nibbana.

			 Dhammapada - 369
%
Cut off the five, abandon the five, and cultivate
the five. The monk who has overcome the five bonds
is called one who has crossed the flood.

			 Dhammapada - 370
%
Meditate, O monk! Do not be heedless. Let not your
mind whirl on sensual pleasures. Heedless, do not
swallow a red-hot iron ball, lest you cry when
burning, “O this is painful!”

			 Dhammapada - 371
%
There is no meditative concentration for him who
lacks insight, and no insight for him who lacks
meditative concentration. He in whom are found
both meditative concentration and insight, indeed,
is close to Nibbana.

			 Dhammapada - 372
%
The monk who has retired to a solitary abode and
calmed his mind, who comprehends the Dhamma with
insight, in him there arises a delight that
transcends all human delights.

			 Dhammapada - 373
%
Whenever he sees with insight the rise and fall of
the aggregates, he is full of joy and happiness.
To the discerning one this reflects the Deathless.

			 Dhammapada - 374
%
Control of the senses, contentment, restraint
according to the code of monastic discipline—these
form the basis of holy life here for the wise
monk.

			 Dhammapada - 375
%
Let him associate with friends who are noble,
energetic, and pure in life, let him be cordial
and refined in conduct. Thus, full of joy, he will
make an end of suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 376
%
Just as the jasmine creeper sheds its withered
flowers, even so, O monks, should you totally shed
lust and hatred!

			 Dhammapada - 377
%
The monk who is calm in body, calm in speech, calm
in thought, well-composed and who has spewn out
worldliness—he, truly, is called serene.

			 Dhammapada - 378
%
By oneself one must censure oneself and scrutinize
oneself. The self-guarded and mindful monk will
always live in happiness.

			 Dhammapada - 379
%
One is one’s own protector, one is one’s own
refuge. Therefore, one should control oneself,
even as a trader controls a noble steed.

			 Dhammapada - 380
%
Full of joy, full of faith in the Teaching of the
Buddha, the monk attains the Peaceful State, the
bliss of cessation of conditioned things.

			 Dhammapada - 381
%
That monk who while young devotes himself to the
Teaching of the Buddha illumines this world like
the moon freed from clouds.

			 Dhammapada - 382
%
Exert yourself, O holy man! Cut off the stream (of
craving), and discard sense desires. Knowing the
destruction of all the conditioned things, become,
O holy man, the knower of the Uncreated (Nibbana)!

			 Dhammapada - 383
%
When a holy man has reached the summit of two
paths (meditative concentration and insight), he
knows the truth and all his fetters fall away.

			 Dhammapada - 384
%
He for whom there is neither this shore nor the
other shore, nor yet both, he who is free of cares
and is unfettered—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 385
%
He who is meditative, stainless and settled, whose
work is done and who is free from cankers, having
reached the highest goal—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 386
%
The sun shines by day, the moon shines by night.
The warrior shines in armor, the holy man shines
in meditation. But the Buddha shines resplendent
all day and all night.

			 Dhammapada - 387
%
Because he has discarded evil, he is called a holy
man. Because he is serene in conduct, he is called
a recluse. And because he has renounced his
impurities, he is called a renunciate.

			 Dhammapada - 388
%
One should not strike a holy man, nor should a
holy man, when struck, give way to anger. Shame on
him who strikes a holy man, and more shame on him
who gives way to anger.

			 Dhammapada - 389
%
Nothing is better for a holy man than when he
holds his mind back from what is endearing. To the
extent the intent to harm wears away, to that
extent does suffering subside.

			 Dhammapada - 390
%
He who does no evil in deed, word and thought, who
is restrained in these three ways—him do I call a
holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 391
%
Just as a brahman priest reveres his sacrificial
fire, even so should one devoutly revere the
person from whom one has learned the Dhamma taught
by the Buddha.

			 Dhammapada - 392
%
Not by matted hair, nor by lineage, nor by birth
does one become a holy man. But he in whom truth
and righteousness exist—he is pure, he is a holy
man.

			 Dhammapada - 393
%
What is the use of your matted hair, O witless
man? What of your garment of antelope’s hide?
Within you is the tangle (of passion); only
outwardly do you cleanse yourself.

			 Dhammapada - 394
%
The person who wears a robe made of rags, who is
lean, with veins showing all over the body, and
who meditates alone in the forest—him do I call a
holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 395
%
I do not call him a holy man because of his
lineage or high-born mother. If he is full of
impeding attachments, he is just a supercilious
man. But who is free from impediments and
clinging—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 396
%
He who, having cut off all fetters, trembles no
more, who has overcome all attachments and is
emancipated—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 397
%
He who has cut off the thong (of hatred), the band
(of craving), and the rope (of false views),
together with the appurtenances (latent evil
tendencies), he who has removed the crossbar (of
ignorance) and is enlightened—him do I call a holy
man.

			 Dhammapada - 398
%
He who without resentment endures abuse, beating
and punishment; whose power, real might, is
patience—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 399
%
He who is free from anger, is devout, virtuous,
without craving, self-subdued and bears his final
body—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 400
%
Like water on a lotus leaf, or a mustard seed on
the point of a needle, he who does not cling to
sensual pleasures—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 401
%
He who in this very life realizes for himself the
end of suffering, who has laid aside the burden
and become emancipated—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 402
%
He who has profound knowledge, who is wise,
skilled in discerning the right or wrong path, and
has reached the highest goal—him do I call a holy
man.

			 Dhammapada - 403
%
He who holds aloof from householders and ascetics
alike, and wanders about with no fixed abode and
but few wants—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 404
%
He who has renounced violence towards all living
beings, weak or strong, who neither kills nor
causes others to kill—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 405
%
He who is friendly amidst the hostile, peaceful
amidst the violent, and unattached amidst the
attached—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 406
%
He whose lust and hatred, pride and hypocrisy have
fallen off like a mustard seed from the point of a
needle—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 407
%
He who utters gentle, instructive and truthful
words, who imprecates none—him do I call a holy
man.

			 Dhammapada - 408
%
He who in this world takes nothing that is not
given to him, be it long or short, small or big,
good or bad—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 409
%
He who wants nothing of either this world or the
next, who is desire-free and emancipated—him do I
call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 410
%
He who has no attachment, who through perfect
knowledge is free from doubts and has plunged into
the Deathless—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 411
%
He who in this world has transcended the ties of
both merit and demerit, who is sorrowless,
stainless and pure—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 412
%
He, who, like the moon, is spotless and pure,
serene and clear, who has destroyed the delight in
existence—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 413
%
He who, having traversed this miry, perilous and
delusive round of existence, has crossed over and
reached the other shore; who is meditative, calm,
free from doubt, and, clinging to nothing, has
attained to Nibbana—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 414
%
He who, having abandoned sensual pleasures, has
renounced the household life and become a homeless
one; has destroyed both sensual desire and
continued existence—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 415
%
He who, having abandoned craving, has renounced
the household life and become a homeless one, has
destroyed both craving and continued existence—him
do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 416
%
He who, casting off human bonds and transcending
heavenly ties, is wholly delivered of all
bondages—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 417
%
He who, having cast off likes and dislikes, has
become tranquil, is rid of the substrata of
existence and like a hero has conquered all the
worlds—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 418
%
He who in every way knows the death and rebirth of
all beings, and is totally detached, blessed and
enlightened—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 419
%
He whose track no gods, no angels, no humans
trace, the arahant who has destroyed all
cankers—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 420
%
He who clings to nothing of the past, present and
future, who has no attachment and holds on to
nothing—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 421
%
He, the Noble, the Excellent, the Heroic, the
Great Sage, the Conqueror, the Passionless, the
Pure, the Enlightened one—him do I call a holy
man.

			 Dhammapada - 422
%
He who knows his former births, who sees heaven
and hell, who has reached the end of births and
attained to the perfection of insight, the sage
who has reached the summit of spiritual
excellence—him do I call a holy man.

			 Dhammapada - 423
%
