Mind precedes thoughts, mind is their chief, their
quality is made by mind, if with a base mind one
speaks or acts, through that suffering follows him
like a wheel follows the ox’s foot. SC 2Mind
precedes thoughts, mind is their chief, their
quality is made by mind, if with pure mind one
speaks or acts, through that happiness follows him
like a shadow which does not depart.

			 Dhammapada - 1
%
“He abused me, he struck at me, he overcame me, he
robbed me,” those who bear ill-will towards this
their hatred is never appeased. SC 4“He abused me,
he struck at me, he overcame me, he robbed me,”
those who do not bear ill-will towards this their
hatred is appeased.

			 Dhammapada - 3
%
For not by hatred do hatreds cease at any time in
this place, they only cease with non-hatred, this
truth is surely eternal.

			 Dhammapada - 5
%
The others do not understand that we should
restrain ourselves here, but for those here who do
understand, through that, their dissensions will
cease.

			 Dhammapada - 6
%
Living contemplating what is pleasant,
uncontrolled in sense faculties, not knowing the
limit in food, indolent, low in energy – Māra
surely overthrows that one, like wind overthrows a
weak tree. SC 8Living contemplating the
unpleasant, well-controlled in sense faculties,
and knowing the limit in food, faithful, with
energy aroused – Māra does not overthrow that one,
just as wind does not overthrow a mountain made of
rock.

			 Dhammapada - 7
%
The one who, while still impure, would wear the
renunciant’s robe, unendowed with restraint and
truth, is not worthy of the renunciant’s robe. SC
10The one who, steady in virtue, throws out any
impurity, endowed with restraint and truth, is
indeed worthy of the renunciant’s robe.

			 Dhammapada - 9
%
Finding the essential in what is unessential, and
seeing the unessential in what is essential, they
do not understand what is essential, and resort to
wrong intention. SC 12Knowing the essential in
what is essential, and the unessential in what is
unessential, they understand what is essential,
and resort to right intention.

			 Dhammapada - 11
%
Just as the rain penetrates a house with thatching
that is poor, so passion penetrates a mind that is
undeveloped. SC 14Just as rain does not penetrate
a house with thatching that is good, so passion
cannot penetrate a mind that is well-developed.

			 Dhammapada - 13
%
Here he laments, after death he laments, the
wicked one laments in both places, he laments, he
suffers vexation, seeing the defilement of his own
deeds. SC 16Here he rejoices, after death he
rejoices, the meritorious one rejoices in both
places, he rejoices, he greatly rejoices, seeing
the purity of his own deeds.

			 Dhammapada - 15
%
Here he suffers, after death he suffers, the
wicked one suffers in both places, he suffers,
thinking: “I have done wickedness,” gone to a bad
fate, he suffers much more. SC 18Here she is
happy, after death she is happy, the righteous one
is happy in both places, she is happy, thinking:
“I have done merit,” gone to a good fate, she is
happy much more.

			 Dhammapada - 17
%
Even though reciting abundant scriptures, the
heedless fellow, who does not do what they say,
like a cowboy counting other’s cattle, does not
partake of the ascetic life.

			 Dhammapada - 19
%
Even though reciting but few scriptures, but
living righteously in accordance with Dhamma,
abandoning greed, hate and delusion, understanding
aright, with mind well-released, that one,
unattached here and hereafter, surely partakes of
the ascetic life.

			 Dhammapada - 20
%
Heedfulness is the deathless state, heedlessness
the state of the dead, the heedful do not die, but
those who are heedless are as if dead.

			 Dhammapada - 21
%
The wise, understanding this difference in regard
to heedfulness, rejoice in heedfulness, delight in
the domain of the Noble Ones.

			 Dhammapada - 22
%
Those who meditate all the time, constant and firm
in their effort, those wise ones reach Nibbāna,
the unsurpassed release from all bonds.

			 Dhammapada - 23
%
For he who is active, mindful, pure in deeds,
considerate, self-controlled, living by Dhamma,
heedful, fame greatly increases.

			 Dhammapada - 24
%
Through activity, heedfulness, through self-
control and through restraint, the sage should
make an island that no flood waters can overcome.

			 Dhammapada - 25
%
The foolish and stupid people cultivate
heedlessness, but the sagacious one guards
heedfulness just as his greatest wealth.

			 Dhammapada - 26
%
Do not cultivate heedlessness, do not be
acquainted with delight in sensual pleasure, for
the heedful one, meditating, surely attains great
happiness.

			 Dhammapada - 27
%
When the wise one eliminates heedlessness with his
heedfulness, and mounts the palace of wisdom,
griefless, he looks on grieving people; the wise
one, like one standing on a mountain, looks down
on the fools, who are standing on the plains.

			 Dhammapada - 28
%
Heedful amongst the heedless ones, wakeful amongst
the ones who sleep, like a swift horse who
abandons a weak horse, the true sage moves on.

			 Dhammapada - 29
%
Through heedfulness Maghavā attained leadership of
the gods, the good praise heedfulness, but
heedlessness is always blamed.

			 Dhammapada - 30
%
A monastic who delights in heedfulness, seeing
danger in heedlessness, advances like burning fire
against the fetter, small or large. SC 32A
monastic who delights in heedfulness, seeing
danger in heedlessness, is unable to fall away: he
is well-nigh to Nibbāna.

			 Dhammapada - 31
%
An agitated, unsteady mind, difficult to guard,
difficult to ward, the sagacious one makes
straight, as a fletcher does his arrow.

			 Dhammapada - 33
%
Like a fish thrown up on dry land, pulled out from
its watery home, the mind is agitated, one ought
to throw off the sway of Māra.

			 Dhammapada - 34
%
For the mind that is difficult to subdue, flighty,
flitting wherever it will, restraint is good, a
restrained mind brings happiness.

			 Dhammapada - 35
%
Hard to see, very subtle, flitting wherever it
will, the sage should guard the mind, a guarded
mind brings happiness.

			 Dhammapada - 36
%
Those who will restrain the mind that roams far,
is lonesome, without a body, hidden, gain release
from the bonds of Māra.

			 Dhammapada - 37
%
For the one with unsettled mind, who does not know
the True Dhamma, whose confidence is wavering,
wisdom is unfulfilled.

			 Dhammapada - 38
%
For the one with mind free of lust, for the one
with mind unperplexed, for the one who has
abandoned making merit and demerit, for the
watchful, there is no fear.

			 Dhammapada - 39
%
Knowing this body is frail like a jar,
establishing the mind like a fortress, fight Māra
with the weapon of wisdom, guard your success, and
do not be attached.

			 Dhammapada - 40
%
Before long has passed by, alas, this body will
lie on the ground, rejected, without
consciousness, just like a useless piece of wood.

			 Dhammapada - 41
%
Whatever an aggressor might do to an aggressor, or
an enemy to an enemy – a mind that is badly-
directed can do far worse than that to him.

			 Dhammapada - 42
%
Mother and father might not do for him, or other
relatives, as much good as a mind that is well-
directed can do for him.

			 Dhammapada - 43
%
Who will know this earth and the lower realm,
together with the gods? Who will reflect on the
well-taught verse of Dhamma as a good man reflects
on a flower?

			 Dhammapada - 44
%
The trainee will know this earth and the lower
realm, together with the gods. The trainee will
reflect on the well-taught verse of Dhamma as a
good man reflects on a flower.

			 Dhammapada - 45
%
Knowing that this body is just like froth,
understanding it has the nature of a mirage,
cutting off Māra’s flower-tipped arrows, one
should go beyond the King of Death’s sight.

			 Dhammapada - 46
%
Death takes up and carries away the one whose mind
is attached to collecting flowers, like a great
flood carries off a sleeping village.

			 Dhammapada - 47
%
The End-Maker takes control of the one whose mind
is attached to collecting flowers, even though he
is unsated with sense pleasures.

			 Dhammapada - 48
%
Just as a bee, without hurting the flower, its
colour or scent, gathers its nectar and escapes,
so should the seer roam in the village.

			 Dhammapada - 49
%
Not the wrongs of others, or what others have done
or have not done one should consider, but what has
been done and not done by oneself.

			 Dhammapada - 50
%
Just like a beautiful flower, which has colour,
but lacks fragrance, so are well-spoken words
fruitless for the one who acts not on them.

			 Dhammapada - 51
%
Just like a beautiful flower, which has colour,
and has fragrance, so are well-spoken words
fruitful for the one who does act on them.

			 Dhammapada - 52
%
Just as from a heap of flowers one might make a
lot of garlands, so should many good deeds be done
by one who is born a mortal.

			 Dhammapada - 53
%
The fragrance of flowers goes not against the
wind, nor does sandalwood or pinwheel or white
jasmine, but the fragrance of the good goes
against the wind, the true person’s fragrance
permeates all directions.

			 Dhammapada - 54
%
Sandalwood, pinwheel, then water lily and striped
jasmine, amongst these kinds of fragrance virtue’s
fragrance is unsurpassed.

			 Dhammapada - 55
%
Pinwheel and sandalwood fragrance are
insignificant, but the fragrance of one who has
virtue flutters supreme amongst the gods.

			 Dhammapada - 56
%
Māra cannot find the path of those endowed with
virtue, who live heedfully, and who are freed
through complete and deep knowledge.

			 Dhammapada - 57
%
Just as in a forsaken and discarded heap along the
highway a lotus might arise in that place, with a
pure fragrance, delighting the mind, SC 59so
amongst the forsaken, the Perfect Sambuddha’s
disciple outshines the blind and ordinary folk
through his wisdom.

			 Dhammapada - 58
%
Long is the night for one awake, long is a league
for one tired, long is the round of births and
deaths for fools who know not True Dhamma.

			 Dhammapada - 60
%
If while roaming one cannot find one better or the
same as oneself, one should resolve to go alone:
there is no friendship with fools.

			 Dhammapada - 61
%
“Sons are mine, riches are mine,” so the fool
suffers vexation, when even self is not his own,
how then sons, how then riches?

			 Dhammapada - 62
%
The fool who knows his foolishness, is at least
wise in that matter, the fool who is proud of his
wisdom, he is said to be a fool indeed.

			 Dhammapada - 63
%
Even if a fool attends on a wise man for his whole
life long, he does not learn Dhamma, just as spoon
learns not the taste of curry.

			 Dhammapada - 64
%
If a perceptive man attends on a wise man even for
a second, he quickly learns Dhamma, just as the
tongue learns the taste of curry.

			 Dhammapada - 65
%
Stupid fools live having themselves as their own
foes, committing wicked deeds, which produce
bitter fruit.

			 Dhammapada - 66
%
That deed is not well done, which, having done,
one has regret, for which he has tears on his
face, as the result follows him round.

			 Dhammapada - 67
%
But that deed is well done, which, having done,
one has no regret, for which he is pleased and
happy, as the result follows him round.

			 Dhammapada - 68
%
The fool thinks it sweet, as long as the wicked
deed does not ripen, but when the wicked deed
ripens, the fool undergoes suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 69
%
From month to month the fool may eat food with the
tip of kusa-grass, but he is not worth a sixteenth
part of those who have mastered Dhamma.

			 Dhammapada - 70
%
A wicked deed that has been done, like milk, does
not turn all at once, smouldering, it follows the
fool, like a fire covered with ashes.

			 Dhammapada - 71
%
As far as learning arises for a fool, it is only
to his disadvantage, it destroys the fool’s good
fortune, and it will destroy his head.

			 Dhammapada - 72
%
He may wish for the respect that is lacking, and
status amongst the monastics, for control in the
living quarters, and worship amongst good
families: SC 74“Householders and renunciants
should both think this was done by me, let them
all be under my sway, in all to be done and not
done”, so does the fool think, meanwhile his
desires and conceit increase.

			 Dhammapada - 73
%
For the means to gains is one thing, the path
going to Nibbāna another, thus knowing this the
monastic disciple of the Buddha should not delight
in honours, but practise in solitude.

			 Dhammapada - 75
%
One should regard someone who shows your faults
just like one who points out hidden treasure, one
should keep company with such a sagacious, learned
person who reproves you; keeping company with such
is surely better for you, not worse.

			 Dhammapada - 76
%
One should advise and instruct, and forbid
whatever is vile, for he is dear to the good, but
he is not dear to the bad.

			 Dhammapada - 77
%
One should not keep company with wicked friends,
one should not keep company with the ignoble, you
should keep company with spiritual friends, you
should keep company with superior people.

			 Dhammapada - 78
%
The one who drinks Dhamma lives well, with a clear
mind, the wise one will always delight in the
Dhamma that is made known by the Noble.

			 Dhammapada - 79
%
Course-makers lead water, fletchers straighten
arrows, carpenters straighten wood, the wise
master themselves.

			 Dhammapada - 80
%
Just as solid rock is not shaken by the wind, so
the wise are not moved by blame or praise.

			 Dhammapada - 81
%
Like a lake that is deep, clear and unruffled,
just so the wise are confident after listening to
Dhamma.

			 Dhammapada - 82
%
True people surely everywhere renounce, the good
do not talk of desiring sense-pleasures; when
touched by pleasure or by suffering, the wise show
neither elation or depression.

			 Dhammapada - 83
%
Not for one’s own sake and not for another’s sake,
not desiring a child, riches, or a kingdom – he
should not desire his success through corruption;
he should be both virtuous and wise and righteous.

			 Dhammapada - 84
%
Amongst humans few people go beyond, the rest of
the people run down the bank, SC 86but those who
live righteously, conforming with this well-taught
Dhamma, those folk will go beyond the realm of
death, which is very hard to cross.

			 Dhammapada - 85
%
Having abandoned the dark state, the wise one
should develop the bright, having gone forth to
homelessness from home; in solitude, where it is
hard to delight.

			 Dhammapada - 87
%
One should desire to delight in that place, having
given up sense pleasures, and having no
possessions, the wise one should purify the self
of defilements of mind.

			 Dhammapada - 88
%
For those who have well developed with right mind
the factors of complete awakening, having given up
grasping, those who delight in being unattached,
pollutant-free, shining forth, are emancipated in
the world.

			 Dhammapada - 89
%
For the one who has reached his goal, who grieves
not, being released on all sides, who has
abandoned all the knots, no consuming fever is
found.

			 Dhammapada - 90
%
The mindful ones who are striving do not delight
in a dwelling, like geese who abandon a lake, they
abandon fondness for homes.

			 Dhammapada - 91
%
For those who have no stores, those who comprehend
food aright, for those whose resort is the
liberation that is empty or signless, like the
birds in the sky, their track is hard to find. SC
93For him whose pollutants are destroyed, who is
not dependent on the foods, for him whose resort
is the liberation that is empty or signless, like
the birds in the sky, his footprint is hard to
find.

			 Dhammapada - 92
%
For the one whose senses are stilled, like horses
well-trained by their charioteer, who has
abandoned conceit, who is without pollutants –
even the gods envy such a one.

			 Dhammapada - 94
%
One untroubled just like the earth, steadfast just
like a city-post, like a lake mud-free – such a
one continues not in births and deaths.

			 Dhammapada - 95
%
His mind is calm, his speech and his actions are
also calm, liberated by right knowledge, such a
one is truly peaceful.

			 Dhammapada - 96
%
The person who is beyond mere faith, who knows
that which is unmade, who has cut off rebirth-
linking, who has destroyed the occasion, who has
thrown out hope and desire, is surely the person
supreme.

			 Dhammapada - 97
%
Whether in the village or wilds, whether on low or
on high ground, wherever the Arahats live, that
ground is surely delightful.

			 Dhammapada - 98
%
The delightful wildernesses where the people do
not delight, those without passion will take
delight, but not those who seek sense pleasures.

			 Dhammapada - 99
%
Though there are a thousand sayings consisting of
useless words, better is one useful word hearing
which one is brought to peace.

			 Dhammapada - 100
%
Though there are a thousand verses consisting of
useless words, better is one word of a verse
hearing which one is brought to peace.

			 Dhammapada - 101
%
One may speak a thousand verses consisting of
useless words, better is one verse of Dhamma,
hearing which one is brought to peace.

			 Dhammapada - 102
%
One may conquer a thousand men a thousand times in
a battle, but having conquered one’s own self, one
would surely be supreme in battle.

			 Dhammapada - 103
%
Conquest over self is better than that over other
people, for the person who conquers himself, who
lives constantly well-restrained, SC 105neither
gods, nor gandhabbas, nor Māra together with
Brahmās, can turn conquest into defeat for a
person who is like this.

			 Dhammapada - 104
%
One might give alms impartially with a thousand
coins of money month by month for a hundred years;
and one might worship someone with developed self
for a second – that worship is surely better than
the hundred-year sacrifice.

			 Dhammapada - 106
%
One person might care for the fire in the woods
for a hundred years; and one might worship someone
with developed self for a second – that worship is
surely better than the hundred-year sacrifice.

			 Dhammapada - 107
%
Whatever the alms or the sacrifice in the world
the one seeking merit may give for a year, all
that comes not to a quarter of the merit – better
is the worship of the upright.

			 Dhammapada - 108
%
For the one who is constantly worshipping
honourable elders, four things increase: the
length of life, beauty, happiness, and strength.

			 Dhammapada - 109
%
One might live for a hundred years, unvirtuous and
uncomposed, but a life of one day is better, for
one with virtue and meditation.

			 Dhammapada - 110
%
One might live for a hundred years, lacking in
wisdom, uncomposed, but a life of one day is
better, for one endowed with wisdom and
meditation.

			 Dhammapada - 111
%
One might live for a hundred years, indolent, with
less energy, but a life of one day is better, for
one with energy set up and firm.

			 Dhammapada - 112
%
One might live for a hundred years without seeing
rise and fall, but a life of one day is better for
the one seeing rise and fall.

			 Dhammapada - 113
%
One might live for a hundred years without seeing
the deathless state, but a life of one day is
better for one seeing the deathless state.

			 Dhammapada - 114
%
One might live for a hundred years without seeing
the supreme state, but a life of one day is better
for one seeing the supreme state.

			 Dhammapada - 115
%
Hasten to do wholesome deeds, ward off the mind
from wickedness, for the mind of the one slow in
merit delights in wickedness.

			 Dhammapada - 116
%
Should a person do that which is wicked, he should
not do it again and again, let him not place his
intention in it, for there is an accumulation of
suffering for the wicked one. SC 118If a person
should make merit, he should do it again and
again, let him place his intention there, there is
an increase of joy for the one who has made merit.

			 Dhammapada - 117
%
Even the wicked one experiences good fortune while
the wickedness does not ripen, but when the
wickedness ripens then the wicked one experiences
wicked things.

			 Dhammapada - 119
%
Even the fortunate one experiences wickedness as
long as the good fortune does not ripen, but when
the fortune ripens then the fortunate one
experiences good fortune.

			 Dhammapada - 120
%
One should not despise a little wickedness
thinking: it will not come to me, through the
falling of water drops the water-pot is quickly
filled, the fool, gathering bit by bit, becomes
full of wickedness.

			 Dhammapada - 121
%
One should not despise a little merit thinking: it
will not come to me, through the falling of water
drops the water-pot is quickly filled, the wise
one, gathering bit by bit, becomes full of merit.

			 Dhammapada - 122
%
Like a merchant on a fearful path, with few
friends and great wealth, as one loving life would
avoid poison, so should one avoid wicked deeds.

			 Dhammapada - 123
%
If there is no wound in his hand he can carry
poison with his hand, poison does not enter
without a wound, there is no bad result for the
one who does no wrong.

			 Dhammapada - 124
%
One offends against the inoffensive one, a
purified and passionless person, that wicked deed
then returns to the fool, like fine dust that is
thrown against the wind.

			 Dhammapada - 125
%
Some are reborn in the womb, but those who are
wicked in the underworld, the righteous go to
heaven, those who are pollutant-free are
emancipated.

			 Dhammapada - 126
%
Neither in the sky, nor in the middle of the
ocean, nor after entering a mountain cleft: there
is no place found on this earth where one can be
free from the results of wicked deeds.

			 Dhammapada - 127
%
Neither in the sky, nor in the middle of the
ocean, nor after entering a mountain cleft: there
is no place found on this earth, in which death
does not overcome one.

			 Dhammapada - 128
%
Everyone trembles at the stick, everyone is in
fear of death, comparing oneself with others, one
should not hurt or have them hurt.

			 Dhammapada - 129
%
Everyone trembles at the stick, for all of them
life is dear, comparing oneself with others, one
should not hurt or have them hurt.

			 Dhammapada - 130
%
One who harms with a stick beings who desire
happiness, while seeking happiness for himself,
won’t find happiness after death.

			 Dhammapada - 131
%
One who harms not with a stick beings who desire
happiness, while seeking happiness for himself,
will find happiness after death.

			 Dhammapada - 132
%
Do not say anything harsh, spoken to they might
answer back to you, for arrogant talk entails
misery, and they might strike you back with a
stick.

			 Dhammapada - 133
%
If you make no sound like a gong that is broken,
you are like one who has attained Nibbāna,
contention is not found in you.

			 Dhammapada - 134
%
Like a cowherd with a stick drives cattle to
pasture, so do old age and death drive life out of
beings.

			 Dhammapada - 135
%
The fool does not understand the wicked deeds he
is doing, the stupid one is consumed by his deeds
as by a burning fire.

			 Dhammapada - 136
%
Whoever offends with a stick those who are
inoffensive and harmless will quickly fall into
one of ten states: SC 138harsh feelings, loss of
his wealth, and the break up of the body, or even
heavy affliction, or surely he will lose his mind,
SC 139there may be danger from the King, or
slander that is terrible, he may suffer from loss
of kin, or from the destruction of wealth, SC
140also his houses may be consumed by flames and
fire, and at the break-up of the body that one
lacking in wisdom will arise in the underworld.

			 Dhammapada - 137
%
Not going naked, nor matted hair, nor mud, nor
fasting or lying on stony ground, dust and dirt,
or striving while squatting, can purify a mortal
who has not removed uncertainty.

			 Dhammapada - 141
%
Even if he were to adorn himself, but is peaceful,
trained, settled, spiritual, and has put aside the
stick towards all beings, he is a brahmin, an
ascetic, a monastic.

			 Dhammapada - 142
%
Whatever person in the world is found restrained
by conscience, and is aware of his fault, is like
a good horse that is restrained by a whip.

			 Dhammapada - 143
%
Like a good horse restrained by the whip, you
should be ardent and spiritually intense. Having
faith, virtue and energy, concentration and
investigation of the Dhamma. One who has
understanding and good conduct, mindfulness, will
abandon this not insignificant suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 144
%
Course-makers lead water, fletchers straighten
arrows, carpenters straighten wood, the mild
master themselves.

			 Dhammapada - 145
%
Why this laughter, why this joy, when the world is
constantly burning, why, when enveloped by
darkness, do you not seek for a light?

			 Dhammapada - 146
%
See this beautified manikin, a heap of sores that
is raised up, sick, imagined in many ways, which
has nothing stable or firm.

			 Dhammapada - 147
%
This body is worn out, a nest of disease,
perishing, the putrid body comes to destruction,
for life ends in death.

			 Dhammapada - 148
%
Like discarded white gourds thrown away in autumn
are these grey bones; seeing them, why is there
delight?

			 Dhammapada - 149
%
This fortress is made out of bones, plastered over
with flesh and blood, but hidden within lie old
age, death, also conceit and anger.

			 Dhammapada - 150
%
Decorated royal chariots decay, and the body also
decays, but the good Dhamma does not decay, the
good surely pass it on to the good.

			 Dhammapada - 151
%
The person of little learning increases in age
like an ox, for although his flesh does increase,
his wisdom does not increase.

			 Dhammapada - 152
%
Through the round of countless births and deaths I
have wandered without finding the housebuilder I
was seeking: born and suffering once again. SC
154O housebuilder, now you are seen! You will not
build the house again: all your rafters have been
broken, and the ridgepole has been destroyed, my
mind has reached the unconditioned, and craving’s
end has been achieved.

			 Dhammapada - 153
%
Not having lived the holy life, not having gained
wealth in their youth, they waste away like herons
in a small lake devoid of fish.

			 Dhammapada - 155
%
Not having lived the holy life, not having gained
wealth in their youth, they lie like shafts shot
from a bow, wailing about things in the past.

			 Dhammapada - 156
%
If one regards oneself as dear one should guard
oneself right well, during one of the three
watches of the night the wise one should stay
alert.

			 Dhammapada - 157
%
First one should establish oneself in what is
suitable, then one can advise another, the wise
one should not have any defilement.

			 Dhammapada - 158
%
He should do himself as he would advise another to
do, being well-trained, he could surely train
another, for it is said the self is difficult to
train.

			 Dhammapada - 159
%
For the self is the friend of self, for what other
friend would there be? When the self is well-
trained, one finds a friend that is hard to find.

			 Dhammapada - 160
%
That wickedness done by oneself, born in oneself,
arising in oneself, crushes the one who is stupid,
as a diamond crushes a rock-jewel.

			 Dhammapada - 161
%
The one who has an exceeding lack of virtue, like
a deadly creeper covering a Sal tree, makes
himself the same as his enemy wishes him to be.

			 Dhammapada - 162
%
Easily done are things not good, and unbeneficial
for oneself, but that which is beneficial and good
is supremely hard to do.

			 Dhammapada - 163
%
Whoever reviles the worthy teaching of the Noble
Ones who live by Dhamma, that stupid one,
depending on wicked views, like the bamboo when it
bears fruit, brings about his own destruction.

			 Dhammapada - 164
%
By oneself alone is a wicked deed done, by oneself
is one defiled, by oneself is a wicked deed left
undone, by oneself is one purified, purity and
impurity come from oneself, for no one can purify
another.

			 Dhammapada - 165
%
One should not neglect one’s own good for
another’s, however great; knowing what is good for
oneself one should be intent on that good.

			 Dhammapada - 166
%
One should not follow lowly things, one should not
abide heedlessly, one should not follow a wrong
view, one should not foster worldliness.

			 Dhammapada - 167
%
One should strive, not be heedless, one should
live by Dhamma, with good conduct, living by
Dhamma one lives at ease in this world and the
next.

			 Dhammapada - 168
%
One should live by Dhamma, with good conduct, not
with bad conduct, living by Dhamma one lives at
ease in this world and the next.

			 Dhammapada - 169
%
One should see it as a bubble, one should see it
as a mirage, looking on the world in this way the
King of Death does not see one.

			 Dhammapada - 170
%
Come, look upon this world adorned like a king’s
gilded chariot, where fools become depressed –
there is no bond for those who understand.

			 Dhammapada - 171
%
Whoever was heedless before, but later is not
heedless, that one shines brightly on this world
like the moon released from a cloud.

			 Dhammapada - 172
%
The one whose wicked deed is covered over by a
good deed – that one shines brightly on this world
like the moon released from a cloud.

			 Dhammapada - 173
%
This world is blind, few here have true insight,
as few go to heaven as birds that escape from the
net.

			 Dhammapada - 174
%
Geese go through the path of the sky, they go
through the firmament by their power, the wise are
led out of the world, after beating Māra and his
host.

			 Dhammapada - 175
%
For the person speaking falsely, who has
transgressed in this one thing, who has abandoned
the next world, there is no wickedness left
undone.

			 Dhammapada - 176
%
The miserly go not to the world of the gods, fools
surely do not praise giving, but the wise one
rejoices in giving, and through that he is happy
hereafter.

			 Dhammapada - 177
%
Having sole sovereignty over the earth, or going
to heaven, or lordship over the whole world –
better is the fruit of stream-entry.

			 Dhammapada - 178
%
He whose victory cannot be undone, whose victory
no one here approaches, the Buddha, whose range is
endless, by what path can you lead the pathless
one?

			 Dhammapada - 179
%
For him there is no desire, attachment, or craving
to lead him anywhere, the Buddha, whose range is
endless, by what path can you lead the pathless
one?

			 Dhammapada - 180
%
Those wise ones intent on meditation, who delight
in the peace of renunciation, even the gods are
envious of them, the Sambuddhas, the ones who are
mindful.

			 Dhammapada - 181
%
It is rare to acquire birth as a human, rare is
the life of mortals, it is rare to hear the True
Dhamma, rare the arising of Buddhas.

			 Dhammapada - 182
%
The non-doing of anything wicked, undertaking of
what is good, the purification of one’s mind -
this is the teaching of the Buddhas.

			 Dhammapada - 183
%
Enduring patience is the supreme austerity,
Nibbāna is supreme say the Buddhas, for one gone
forth does not hurt another, nor does an ascetic
harass another.

			 Dhammapada - 184
%
Not finding fault, not hurting, restraint by the
regulations, knowing the right measure of food,
living in a remote dwelling, devotion to
meditation - this is the teaching of the Buddhas.

			 Dhammapada - 185
%
Not through a rain of coins is satisfaction found
for sense desires, the wise one knowing: “Sense
pleasures have little joy, much suffering,” SC
187does not find delight even in heavenly
pleasures. The disciple of the Perfect Sambuddha
delights in craving’s destruction.

			 Dhammapada - 186
%
Many people shaken by fear go for refuge to woods
and mountains, to tree shrines in pleasure parks.
SC 189That is not a secure refuge, that is not the
refuge supreme, that is not the refuge to come to
that liberates from all suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 188
%
Whoever has gone refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma
and the Saṅgha, and who sees with right wisdom the
four noble truths: SC 191Suffering, arising of
suffering, and the overcoming of suffering, the
eightfold noble path leading to the stilling of
suffering. SC 192That is a secure refuge, that is
the refuge supreme, that is the refuge to come to
that liberates from all suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 190
%
A person of good breed is rare, that one is not
born everywhere, wherever that wise one is born,
that family gains happiness.

			 Dhammapada - 193
%
The arising of the Buddhas is good, the teaching
of the True Dhamma is good, the harmony of the
Saṅgha is good, devotion to harmony is good.

			 Dhammapada - 194
%
For those who worship those worthy of worship,
whether Buddhas or disciples, who have overcome
the impediments, crossed over grief and
lamentation; SC 196for those who worship such as
these, the emancipated, the fearless, no one is
able to measure their vast merit, saying: it is as
much as this.

			 Dhammapada - 195
%
Let us live truly happily, without hatred, amongst
those who have hatred, amongst humans who have
hatred let us live without hatred.

			 Dhammapada - 197
%
Let us live truly happily, without sickness,
amongst those who are sick, amongst humans who
have sickness let us live without sickness.

			 Dhammapada - 198
%
Let us live truly happily, without longing,
amongst those who are longing, amongst humans who
are longing let us live without longing.

			 Dhammapada - 199
%
We live truly happily enough having no possessions
ourselves, we will feed on joy like the gods of
Streaming Light.

			 Dhammapada - 200
%
The victor generates hatred, the defeated one
finds suffering, the one at peace lives happily,
having abandoned victory and defeat.

			 Dhammapada - 201
%
There is no fire like passion, there is no offence
like hatred, there is no suffering like the
components of mind and body, no happiness other
than peace.

			 Dhammapada - 202
%
Hunger is the supreme sickness, conditions are the
supreme suffering, knowing this as it really is,
know Nibbāna is the supreme good.

			 Dhammapada - 203
%
Health is the supreme gain, content the supreme
wealth, confidence the supreme kin, Nibbāna the
supreme good.

			 Dhammapada - 204
%
Savouring the taste of solitude, and the taste of
peace, he is fearless, faultless, savouring the
joyful taste of Dhamma.

			 Dhammapada - 205
%
Meeting with the noble is good, living together
with them is always pleasant, through not meeting
foolish people one will constantly be happy.

			 Dhammapada - 206
%
For he who consorts with fools grieves for a long
time, dwelling with fools is always suffering as
it is with enemies, the wise one dwells happily as
with an assembly of kin.

			 Dhammapada - 207
%
therefore, the firm, the wise and the learned, the
virtuous, dutiful and noble – accompany such a
true and intelligent person as the moon
accompanies the course of the stars.

			 Dhammapada - 208
%
Engaging oneself in what is not suitable, not
engaging in what is suitable, abandoning the good,
grasping the loved, he envies the one who
endeavours for himself.

			 Dhammapada - 209
%
Do not associate at any time with those who are
loved or with those unloved, there is suffering
not meeting those loved, and suffering from
meeting those unloved.

			 Dhammapada - 210
%
Therefore do not hold anything as loved, for
losing those who are loved is loathsome. There are
no knots for those who hold nothing as loved or as
unloved.

			 Dhammapada - 211
%
From love there arises grief, from love there
arises fear, for one who is free from love there
is no grief, how is there fear?

			 Dhammapada - 212
%
From fondness there arises grief, from fondness
there arises fear, for one who is free from
fondness there is no grief, how is there fear?

			 Dhammapada - 213
%
From delight there arises grief, from delight
there arises fear, for one who is free from
delight there is no grief, how is there fear?

			 Dhammapada - 214
%
From desire there arises grief, from desire there
arises fear, for one who is free from desire there
is no grief, how is there fear?

			 Dhammapada - 215
%
From craving there arises grief, from craving
there arises fear, for one who is free from
craving there is no grief, how is there fear?

			 Dhammapada - 216
%
Endowed with virtue and insight, principled,
knowing the truths, doing the deeds that are his
own, that one the people love.

			 Dhammapada - 217
%
The one with desire arisen for the undeclared,
will be suffused with the awakening mind, with a
mind unconnected with sense pleasures, he is
spoken of as ‘one gone upstream’.

			 Dhammapada - 218
%
When one who lives abroad for a long time comes
safely from afar, his relatives, friends and
companions come and greatly rejoice. SC 220Just
so, when one who has performed merit goes from
this world unto the next, his merits are received
just as relatives come to their loved one.

			 Dhammapada - 219
%
One should abandon anger, one should abandon
conceit, one should overcome every fetter, without
clinging to mind and bodily form, sufferings never
do befall the one having no possessions.

			 Dhammapada - 221
%
Whoever should hold back arisen anger just like a
swerving chariot, that one I say is a charioteer,
other people are just rein-holders.

			 Dhammapada - 222
%
Through kindness one should overcome anger,
through goodness one should overcome a lack of
goodness, through gifts one should overcome
stinginess, through truth one should overcome
lying speech. SC 224One should speak out the
truth, one should not get angry, when requested
give, if only a little, through these three
conditions one can go to the presence of the gods.

			 Dhammapada - 223
%
Those sages without violence, constantly
restrained in body, go to the deathless Nibbāna,
having gone there they do not grieve. SC 226For
those who are always wakeful, who train both by
day and by night, who are intent on Nibbāna, the
pollutants are laid to rest.

			 Dhammapada - 225
%
This is something of old, Atula, this is not
something of today: they blame the one who sits
silently, they blame the one who talks a lot, they
blame the one who talks in moderation, there is no
one in the world not blamed.

			 Dhammapada - 227
%
There was not and there will not be, and at
present there is not found a person totally
blameworthy, or one totally praiseworthy.

			 Dhammapada - 228
%
The one who, after being examined day by day, is
praised by the wise, faultless in conduct,
sagacious, attending to virtue and wisdom, SC
230one who is like a golden coin, who is there
worthy to blame him? That one is praised by the
gods, and has been praised by the Brahmās too.

			 Dhammapada - 229
%
One should guard against bodily anger, one should
be restrained bodily, abandoning wrong bodily
conduct, one should have good bodily conduct.

			 Dhammapada - 231
%
One should guard against verbal anger, one should
be restrained verbally, abandoning wrong verbal
conduct, one should have good verbal conduct. SC
233One should guard against mental anger, one
should be restrained mentally, abandoning wrong
mental conduct, one should have good mental
conduct.

			 Dhammapada - 232
%
The wise are restrained bodily, then they are
restrained verbally, the wise are restrained
mentally, they are indeed very well-restrained.

			 Dhammapada - 234
%
You are now like a withered leaf, Yama’s men stand
waiting for you, you stand at decay’s door, with
no provisions for the journey found.

			 Dhammapada - 235
%
One should make an island for oneself, soon the
wise one should endeavour, removing the stain,
blemishless, you will go to the divine and noble
realm.

			 Dhammapada - 236
%
You are now advanced in age, you have come to
Yama’s presence, there is nowhere to dwell in
between, with no provisions for the journey found.

			 Dhammapada - 237
%
One should make an island for oneself, soon the
wise one should endeavour, removing the stain,
blemishless, you will not come to birth and old
age again.

			 Dhammapada - 238
%
The sage gradually, little by little, moment by
moment, should remove the stain from himself, like
a smith removes the stain from silver.

			 Dhammapada - 239
%
As a rust stain arises from iron, and arisen from
that, it eats it away, so with one who is
overindulgent – his deeds lead him to a bad
destiny.

			 Dhammapada - 240
%
Lack of repetition is the ruin of chants, a lack
of maintenance is the ruin of homes, indolence is
the ruin of one’s appearance, heedlessness is the
ruin of the one on guard.

			 Dhammapada - 241
%
Bad conduct is a woman’s stain, stinginess is a
giver’s stain, wicked actions are indeed stains
both in this world and in the next. SC 243A stain
that is worse than that stain, ignorance is the
supreme stain, after abandoning that stain, be
without stains, O monastics!

			 Dhammapada - 242
%
Life is light for one without shame, with the bold
courage of a crow, living a life with backbiting,
recklessness, and defilements.

			 Dhammapada - 244
%
Life is hard when endowed with shame, for the one
constantly seeking purity, for one sincere, and
not reckless, looking for purity of life.

			 Dhammapada - 245
%
Whoever kills a living being, and speaks a word
that is not true, takes what is not given here,
and goes to another’s wife, SC 247that person who
is devoted to a drink of liquor and wine, digs up
his own root right here in the world.

			 Dhammapada - 246
%
Know it thus, dear sir, a lack of restraint is a
bad thing, let not greed and corruption oppress
you with suffering for a long time.

			 Dhammapada - 248
%
The people give according to faith, according to
their confidence, herein the one who becomes
dejected because of food and drink given to others
he does not, either by day or nigh attain to good
concentration.

			 Dhammapada - 249
%
For the one in whom this dejection is cut off,
destroyed at the root, dug up, does, by day and
night, attain to good concentration.

			 Dhammapada - 250
%
There is no fire that is like passion, there is
nothing that takes a hold like hatred, there is no
snare like delusion, there is no flood like
craving.

			 Dhammapada - 251
%
Easy to see are others’ fault, but one’s own is
hard to see, for one sifts other peoples’ faults
like they were chaff, but conceals one’s own
faults, like a crafty cheat conceals his defeat.

			 Dhammapada - 252
%
The one who constantly looks for another’s fault,
who is an abject complainer, for him the
pollutants increase, he is far from their
destruction.

			 Dhammapada - 253
%
There is no footprint in the sky, there is no
ascetic on the outside, folk greatly delight in
impediments, the Realised Ones are free of
impediments.

			 Dhammapada - 254
%
There is no footprint in the sky, there is no
ascetic on the outside, there are no constant
conditions, there is no disturbance for the
Buddhas.

			 Dhammapada - 255
%
One who would hastily settle a case because of
that is not one who stands by Dhamma, the wise one
should discriminate the two: what is the case and
what is not the case.

			 Dhammapada - 256
%
The one who settles for other people without
haste, justly and impartially, the sagacious one,
protecting Dhamma, is said to be one who stands by
Dhamma.

			 Dhammapada - 257
%
One is not a wise person merely because of
speaking much; being safe, hatred-free, fearless,
one is called a wise person.

			 Dhammapada - 258
%
One is not a Dhamma-bearer merely through speaking
much, but the one who, having heard a little, sees
Dhamma for himself, is one who bears Dhamma, the
one who is not heedless regarding Dhamma.

			 Dhammapada - 259
%
One is not an elder because one’s head has grey
hair, for the one who is only well-matured, aged,
is said to be old in vain.

			 Dhammapada - 260
%
In whom is truth, Dhamma, non-violence, restraint
and good training, the wise one who throws out the
stain is truly called an elder.

			 Dhammapada - 261
%
Not by eloquence only, or by a beautiful
complexion, is a person honourable, if still
jealous, selfish and deceitful; SC 263for the one
in whom this is cut off, destroyed at the root,
dug up, that sage who has thrown out hatred is
said to be honourable.

			 Dhammapada - 262
%
Not through a shaven head is one an ascetic, if
one lacks vows, speaks lies, and is endowed with
greed and desire, how will one be an ascetic?

			 Dhammapada - 264
%
The one who pacifies wicked deeds, small and
great, in every way – through the pacifing of
wicked deeds he is said to be an ascetic.

			 Dhammapada - 265
%
One is not a monastic merely through eating
others’ almsfood, the one who undertakes a false
Dhamma to that extent is not a monastic.

			 Dhammapada - 266
%
If he is one who lives the holy life here, warding
off both merit and demerit, and wanders with
discrimination in the world, that one is said to
be a monastic.

			 Dhammapada - 267
%
Not through silence is a deluded fool considered
to be a seer, the wise one, like one holding the
balance, takes up what is noble.

			 Dhammapada - 268
%
The seer who rejects wicked deeds through that is
considered a seer, whoever understands both worlds
because of that is said to be a seer.

			 Dhammapada - 269
%
Not through hurting breathing beings one is noble,
the one who does not hurt any breathing beings is
said to be noble.

			 Dhammapada - 270
%
Not merely through virtue or vows, or through
great learning, or through the attainment of
concentration, or through a secluded dwelling, SC
272do I attain the happiness of renunciation, not
practised by worldly people; let a monastic not be
confident as long as the destruction of the
pollutants is unattained.

			 Dhammapada - 271
%
The eightfold is the best of paths, four
principles the best of truths, passionlessness the
best of states, the Visionary the best of men.

			 Dhammapada - 273
%
This is the path, there is no other, for insight
and for purity, you should enter upon this path,
this is the confounding of Māra.

			 Dhammapada - 274
%
Having entered upon this path you will make an end
to suffering, the path was declared by me, the
removal of the dart by knowledge.

			 Dhammapada - 275
%
Your duty is to have ardour declare the Realised
Ones, entering this path meditators will be
released from the bonds of Māra.

			 Dhammapada - 276
%
All conditions are impermanent, when one sees this
with wisdom, then one grows tired of suffering –
this is the path to purity.

			 Dhammapada - 277
%
All conditions are suffering, when one sees this
with wisdom, then one grows tired of suffering –
this is the path to purity.

			 Dhammapada - 278
%
All components of mind and body are without self,
when one sees this with wisdom, then one grows
tired of suffering – this is the path to purity.

			 Dhammapada - 279
%
The one who has not energy at a time for energy,
youthful, strong, but given to laziness, whose
mind lacks right intention and is indolent – the
lazy one does not find wisdom’s path.

			 Dhammapada - 280
%
Verbally guarded, well-restrained in mind, not
doing a wrong deed with the body, one should
purify these three paths of action, one should
undertake the path shown by seers.

			 Dhammapada - 281
%
From effort arises wisdom, without effort wisdom
is destroyed, having understood these two paths of
development and decline, one should establish
oneself so that one’s wisdom increases.

			 Dhammapada - 282
%
Cut down the forest of defilements not just a
tree, from the forest arises a danger, having cut
down the forest and thicket, you should be without
forests, monastics.

			 Dhammapada - 283
%
For as long as an atom of desire of a man for a
woman is not cut down, for just so long is the
mind in bondage, like a calf in bondage to
mother’s milk.

			 Dhammapada - 284
%
Cut off any affection for one’s self, like an
autumn lotus plucked with the hand, develop fully
the path to peace and Nibbāna taught by the
Fortunate One.

			 Dhammapada - 285
%
“Here I will dwell during the rains, here during
winter and summer”, in just such a way a fool
thinks, not understanding the danger.

			 Dhammapada - 286
%
That person whose mind is attached and besotted by
cattle and children, is snatched away by death
just as a sleeping village by a great flood.

			 Dhammapada - 287
%
Children are not a refuge, nor fathers, not even
kin, for one overcome by the End-Maker there is no
refuge in relatives.

			 Dhammapada - 288
%
Understanding the truth of this the wise one,
endowed with virtue, should quickly purify the
path that is leading to Nibbāna.

			 Dhammapada - 289
%
If, by renouncing a small good, he might see a
good that is large, the wise one should renounce
that small good, seeing the good that is
extensive.

			 Dhammapada - 290
%
One who desires happiness for oneself by causing
suffering for another, being associated thus with
hatred, is not fully released from that hatred.

			 Dhammapada - 291
%
That to be done is rejected, but what is not to be
done is done, for the insolent, the heedless,
their pollutants increase.

			 Dhammapada - 292
%
But for those who always properly undertake
mindfulness of the body who do not practice what
is not to be done, persisting in what is to be
done, for those mindful ones, those fully aware,
the pollutants are laid to rest.

			 Dhammapada - 293
%
Destroying mother and father, and then two noble
kings, destroying a kingdom and its followers, the
brahmin proceeds untroubled.

			 Dhammapada - 294
%
Destroying mother and father, and two prosperous
kings, destroying a tiger as the fifth, the
brahmin proceeds untroubled.

			 Dhammapada - 295
%
Gotama’s disciples always awake to a good
wakening, those who day and night constantly have
mindfulness of the Buddha.

			 Dhammapada - 296
%
Gotama’s disciples always awake to a good
wakening, those who day and night constantly have
mindfulness of the Dhamma.

			 Dhammapada - 297
%
Gotama’s disciples always awake to a good
wakening, those who day and night constantly have
mindfulness of the Saṅgha.

			 Dhammapada - 298
%
Gotama’s disciples always awake to a good
wakening, those who day and night constantly have
mindfulness of the body.

			 Dhammapada - 299
%
Gotama’s disciples always awake to a good
wakening, those who day and night have a mind that
delights in non-violence.

			 Dhammapada - 300
%
Gotama’s disciples always awake to a good
wakening, those who day and night have a mind that
delights in cultivation.

			 Dhammapada - 301
%
The going forth is hard, it is hard to find
delight therein, but it is also hard to dwell in
households that are suffering, dwelling together
with those different is suffering, travellers in
the round of births are affected by suffering,
therefore do not be a traveller, do not be
affected by suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 302
%
The faithful one who is endowed with virtue, and
has wealth and fame, whatever district he resorts
to, right there and then he is worshipped.

			 Dhammapada - 303
%
The good are visible from far, like a mountain
covered in snow, but the wicked are not seen here,
just like arrows shot in the night.

			 Dhammapada - 304
%
Sitting alone, lying down alone, walking alone,
diligent, the solitary one who trains himself will
delight in the edge of a forest.

			 Dhammapada - 305
%
The one who speaks falsely goes to the underworld,
and he who says: ‘I did not do’ what he has done,
both of these are just the same when they have
gone to the hereafter, they are humans who did
base deeds.

			 Dhammapada - 306
%
Many wearing the monastic robe around their necks
are wicked, unrestrained, the wicked through their
wicked deeds re-arisein the underworld.

			 Dhammapada - 307
%
It’s better to have eaten a glowing iron ball,
like a flame of fire, than that the monastic who
is unrestrained and unvirtuous should enjoy the
country’s almsfood.

			 Dhammapada - 308
%
There are four states the man who is heedless, the
man who consorts with other man’s wives,
undergoes: he gains demerit, an uncomfortable bed,
blame as third, and rebirth in the underworld as
fourth.

			 Dhammapada - 309
%
Gaining demerit and a bad destiny, and only the
small delight of a scared man with a scared woman,
and kings who apply heavy punishment, a man
therefore should not consort with another’s wife.

			 Dhammapada - 310
%
As jagged grass, wrongly grasped, cuts into the
hand, so does the ascetic life, wrongly grasped,
drag one down to the underworld.

			 Dhammapada - 311
%
Whatever lax deed there is and that vow which is
defiled, know that a holy life that is doubtful
does not have great fruit for that one.

			 Dhammapada - 312
%
If he would do what should be done, he should be
firm in his effort, for the wanderer who is lax
spreads a lot of impurity.

			 Dhammapada - 313
%
Better undone is a wrong-doing, a wrong-doing one
later regrets, better done is what is well-done,
which, when done, one does not regret.

			 Dhammapada - 314
%
As a border town is guarded on the inside and the
outside, so one should watch over oneself, and you
should not let the moment pass, for when the
chance has passed they grieve when consigned to
the underworld.

			 Dhammapada - 315
%
They are ashamed of what is not shameful, not
ashamed of what is shameful, undertaking wrong
views, beings go to a bad destiny.

			 Dhammapada - 316
%
Seeing fear in what is not fearful, not seeing
fear in what is fearful, undertaking wrong views,
beings go to a bad destiny.

			 Dhammapada - 317
%
Finding blame in what is blameless, not seeing
blame in what is blameable, undertaking wrong
views, beings go to a bad destiny.

			 Dhammapada - 318
%
Knowing blame in what is blameable, and no blame
in what is blameless, undertaking right views,
beings go to a good destiny.

			 Dhammapada - 319
%
Like an elephant in battle endures an arrow shot
from bow so will I endure abuse, for many people
are unvirtuous.

			 Dhammapada - 320
%
They lead one trained into a crowd, a king mounts
one who has been trained, amongst humans one
trained is best, the one who can endure abuse.

			 Dhammapada - 321
%
Noble are the well-trained horses, the well-bred
horses from Sindh, and the great tusker elephants,
and even more noble than that is the one who has
trained himself.

			 Dhammapada - 322
%
Not by these vehicles can one go to the place
beyond destinations, as one through training
himself well, being trained by the training, goes.

			 Dhammapada - 323
%
The tusker named Dhanapālaka musty in rut,
difficult to restrain, bound, he doesn’t eat even
a morsel, the tusker remembers the elephant
forest.

			 Dhammapada - 324
%
When one is torpid and overeats, sleepy and
rolling on the bed, like a great pig fed on
fodder, that fool comes to the womb again.

			 Dhammapada - 325
%
Formerly this wandering mind wandered through
desire, pleasure and happiness, but today I will
control it wisely, like one with goad an elephant
in rut.

			 Dhammapada - 326
%
You should delight in heedfulness, you should
always protect your mind, you should raise
yourself from this pit like the tusker sunk in the
mud.

			 Dhammapada - 327
%
If you should find a prudent friend or companion,
one who lives well, a wise one, overcoming all
your troubles you should live with that one, glad
and mindful.

			 Dhammapada - 328
%
If you do not find a prudent friend or companion,
one who lives well, a wise one, like a king who
abandons his conquered kingdom one should live
alone like a solitary elephant in the forest.

			 Dhammapada - 329
%
It is better to live alone, there can be no
friendship with a fool, one should live alone and
not do anything bad, unconcerned like a solitary
elephant in the forest.

			 Dhammapada - 330
%
Friends are good whenever need arises, being
content with everything is good, at the break-up
of life merit is good, the abandoning of all
suffering is good.

			 Dhammapada - 331
%
Respecting one’s mother is good in the world, also
respecting one’s father is good, respecting
ascetics is good in the world, also respecting
true brahmins is good.

			 Dhammapada - 332
%
Virtuous conduct till old age is good, the
establishing of faith is good, the acquisition of
wisdom is good, doing nothing wicked is good.

			 Dhammapada - 333
%
For a human who lives life heedlessly craving
increases like a clinging creeper, he rushes from
one place to another like a monkey desiring fruit
in the forest.

			 Dhammapada - 334
%
That one who is overcome by these low cravings and
attachments in the world, for him griefs increase
like grass that has had heavy rain.

			 Dhammapada - 335
%
Whoever overcomes this low craving in the world,
which is difficult to get past, griefs fall from
him like a drop of water from a lotus.

			 Dhammapada - 336
%
This I say to you: “Good luck to as many as have
assembled here”, dig up the root of craving, like
one seeking the root digs up grass, do not let
Māra push you down again like a stream pushes down
the reed.

			 Dhammapada - 337
%
Just as when the root remains firm and untroubled
though the tree was cut down, it grows again, so
when the tendency to craving is not rooted out
this suffering appears again and again.

			 Dhammapada - 338
%
He in whom the thirty-six streams flow pleasantly
and strong, the one with wrong view, is carried
away by his passionate intentions.

			 Dhammapada - 339
%
Streams are flowing everywhere, the creepers
remain where they grow, seeing this, cut the
creeper’s root that has arisen with wisdom.

			 Dhammapada - 340
%
There are flowing streams of affection and mental
happinesses for a person, pleasure-dependent they
seek happiness, those people undergo both birth
and old age.

			 Dhammapada - 341
%
People surrounded by craving crawl round like a
hare in a trap, attached and clinging to fetters
they come back again and again to suffering for a
long time.

			 Dhammapada - 342
%
People surrounded by craving crawl round like a
hare in a trap, therefore he should remove craving
– the monk who longs for dispassion for himself.

			 Dhammapada - 343
%
The one who is free from desires, who is intent on
the forest, though free from the forest, runs back
to the forest, come here and look at that person,
though free, he runs back to bondage.

			 Dhammapada - 344
%
That bondage is not so strong say the wise, that
is made of iron or wood or reeds, impassioned and
excited they seek out jewels and earrings and
children and wives – SC 346that bondage is strong
say the wise, dragging down the lax, hard to get
free from, having cut this down they wander about
seeking nothing, abandoning the happiness in
pleasure.

			 Dhammapada - 345
%
Those who are impassioned by passion follow the
stream like a spider a web made by itself, having
cut this away the wise proceed, seeking nothing,
abandoning all suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 347
%
Be free of the past, be free of the future, be
free of the present, after crossing over all
existence, with mind liberated in every way, you
will not return to birth and old age.

			 Dhammapada - 348
%
For a person crushed by thoughts and pierced by
passion, contemplating the attractive, craving
increases much more, this surely makes the bond
more firm.

			 Dhammapada - 349
%
Whoever has delight in the calming of thoughts,
who always mindfully cultivates what is
unattractive, will surely abolish this craving, he
will cut off the bond of Māra.

			 Dhammapada - 350
%
Having gone to the end, without trembling, without
craving, without impurity, cutting off the darts
of existence, this one is his final body.

			 Dhammapada - 351
%
Without craving, without attachment, skilled in
words and their explanation, knowing how syllables
are arranged, which come before and which after,
the one in his final body is said to be a great
person, one of great wisdom.

			 Dhammapada - 352
%
All-Conquering, All-Wise am I, undefiled regarding
all things, having given up everything, liberated
through craving’s destruction, when having deep
knowledge myself, who should I point to as
Teacher?

			 Dhammapada - 353
%
The gift of the Dhamma surpasses all other gifts,
the taste of the Dhamma surpasses all other
tastes, the love of the Dhamma surpasses all other
loves, destruction of craving overcomes all
suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 354
%
Riches destroy the stupid one who does not seek
the way beyond, through his craving for riches the
stupid one destroys others and himself.

			 Dhammapada - 355
%
Fields are ruined by grassy weeds, these people
are ruined by passion, therefore there is great
fruit for that given to those without passion.

			 Dhammapada - 356
%
Fields are ruined by grassy weeds, these people
are ruined by hatred, therefore there is great
fruit for that given to those without hatred.

			 Dhammapada - 357
%
Fields are ruined by grassy weeds, these people
are ruined by delusion, therefore there is great
fruit for that given to those without delusion.

			 Dhammapada - 358
%
Fields are ruined by grassy weeds, these people
are ruined by desire, therefore there is great
fruit for that given to those without desire.

			 Dhammapada - 359
%
Restraint of eye is good, restraint of ear is
good, restraint of nose is good, restraint of
tongue is good, SC 361restraint of body is good,
restraint of speech is good, restraint of mind is
good, restraint is everywhere good, a monastic who
is restrained everywhere is liberated from all
suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 360
%
One who controls his hands, controls his feet,
controls his speech, controls the mind supreme,
with inner delight and composure, solitary,
content: that one is called a monastic.

			 Dhammapada - 362
%
That monastic who restrains the mouth, who speaks
well, and who is modest, who explains the meaning
of the Dhamma, his speech is sweet.

			 Dhammapada - 363
%
The one who finds pleasure in the Dhamma, delights
in Dhamma, reflects on Dhamma, the monastic who
remembers Dhamma, does not abandon the Good
Dhamma.

			 Dhammapada - 364
%
One should not despise one’s own gains, one should
not live envious of others, the monastic who is
envious of others does not attain concentration.

			 Dhammapada - 365
%
Even if a monastic gains little he should not
despise his gains, even the very gods praise the
one of pure life who is diligent.

			 Dhammapada - 366
%
The one who does not have fondness at all for mind
and body, and who grieves not for what does not
exist, is surely called a monastic.

			 Dhammapada - 367
%
That monastic who dwells in loving-kindness, with
faith in Buddha’s dispensation, should attain the
state of peace, the joy in stilling of all
conditions.

			 Dhammapada - 368
%
Please bail out this boat, monastic, when bailed
out it will go lightly, cutting off passion and
hatred, from here one will go to Nibbāna.

			 Dhammapada - 369
%
One should cut off five, one should abandon five,
one should cultivate five more, the monastic who
surmounts five attachments is called a flood-
crosser.

			 Dhammapada - 370
%
Meditate, monastic, do not be heedless, do not let
your mind swirl around in strands of desire, do
not, heedless, swallow a hot iron ball, do not,
while burning, cry: ‘This is suffering.’

			 Dhammapada - 371
%
There is no concentration for one without wisdom,
there is no wisdom for one without concentration,
the one who has both concentration and wisdom is
indeed in the presence of Nibbāna.

			 Dhammapada - 372
%
For the one who has entered an empty place, a
monastic with a peaceful mind, there is superhuman
delight from insight into true Dhamma.

			 Dhammapada - 373
%
Whoever has right mindfulness regarding the rise
and fall of the components of mind and body gains
joy and happiness, that is the deathless state for
the one who knows.

			 Dhammapada - 374
%
This is the very beginning for the wise monastic
here: contentment, guarding the senses, and
restraint in the regulations.

			 Dhammapada - 375
%
One should resort to spiritual friends, ones of
pure life, ones who are diligent, one should be of
friendly disposition, one who will be skilful in
his conduct, rejoicing frequently because of that,
one will make an end to suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 376
%
Just as striped jasmine casts off its withered
flowers, so, monastics, cast off all passion and
hatred.

			 Dhammapada - 377
%
Calm in body and calm in speech, having calmness
and composure, having thrown off worldly gain the
monastic is called one at peace.

			 Dhammapada - 378
%
By oneself one should censure self, by oneself one
should be controlled, he who guards himself,
mindful, will live happily, monastic. SC 380Self
is the protector of self, self is the refuge of
self, therefore one should restrain oneself, as a
merchant his noble horse.

			 Dhammapada - 379
%
The monastic, having much happiness, with faith in
the dispensation of the Buddha, could attain to
the state of peace, happy in the stilling of all
conditions.

			 Dhammapada - 381
%
That young monastic who is devoted to the Buddha’s
dispensation, shines forth in this world, like the
moon freed from a cloud.

			 Dhammapada - 382
%
Strive and cut off the stream, remove desire,
brahmin, knowing the destruction of the
conditioned, be one who knows that which is not
made, brahmin. SC 384When a brahmin has, through
two things, crossed over, then, for one who knows,
all the fetters are laid to rest.

			 Dhammapada - 383
%
For whom the near shore, the far shore or both do
not exist, free of anxiety, being detached, that
one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 385
%
The meditator sitting down, the one who is
dustless, who has done his duty, without
pollutants, who has reached the ultimate good,
that one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 386
%
The sun is radiant by day, the moon shines by
night, the accoutred noble is radiant, the
meditating brahmin is radiant, yet every day and
night the Buddha is radiant through his power.

			 Dhammapada - 387
%
Warding off wickedness one is called a brahmin,
one living austerely is said to be an ascetic,
because of driving forth all stain from oneself
one is said to be one who has gone forth.

			 Dhammapada - 388
%
A brahmin should not hit a brahmin, nor should he
abandon him, woe to the one who strikes a brahmin,
further: woe to the one who abandons him.

			 Dhammapada - 389
%
It is no little good for the brahmin: when the
mind is held back from what is dear, whenever his
mind turns back from violence, then there is a
calming of suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 390
%
For whom there is no wrong-doing bodily, verbally
or mentally, being restrained in these three
things, that one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 391
%
That one from whom one learned Dhamma taught by
the Perfect Sambuddha, with respect bow down to
him, like brahmin bows at fire-sacrifice.

			 Dhammapada - 392
%
Not because of matted hair, family or birth is one
a true brahmin, in whom there is truth and Dhamma,
that one is pure, that one is surely a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 393
%
Why do you have your hair matted, stupid one, and
why your deer-skin? Within you there is a jungle,
you only polish the outside.

			 Dhammapada - 394
%
That one who wears discarded clothes, who is lean
with protruding veins, who meditates alone in the
forest, that one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 395
%
I do not call one a brahmin simply because of
being born from a certain womb, that one is just
one who says ‘bho’ if he is attached; having
nothing and unattached, that one I say is a
brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 396
%
Whoever has cut off all the fetters surely does
not tremble, surmounting attachments, detached,
that one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 397
%
Whoever has cut off the thong, the strap, the
rope, together with the bridle, who has thrown off
the obstacle and is awakened, that one I say is a
brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 398
%
Whoever, being pure, forbears with punishment,
bondage and abuse, having the strength of
endurance, having an army of strengths,, that one
I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 399
%
Whoever is controlled of mind, dutiful, virtuous,
taint-free, well-trained and in his last body,
that one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 400
%
Like water on the lotus leaf, like a mustard seed
on a needle, he who is unsmeared by desires, that
one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 401
%
Whoever knows right here the destruction of his
suffering, putting down the burden, detached, that
one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 402
%
The deeply wise sagacious one, skilled in what is
path and not path, who has reached the ultimate
good, that one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 403
%
Whoever doesn’t mix with either householders or
the houseless, wandering homeless, with few
desires, that one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 404
%
Whoever has laid down the stick used against
fearful and fearless beings, who neither hurts nor
kills, that one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 405
%
Being friendly with the hostile, calm amongst
those holding a stick, not attached amongst those
attached, that one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 406
%
Whoever has dropped off passion and hatred,
conceit and anger, like a mustard seed from a
needle, that one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 407
%
Whoever speaks a word of truth that is informed
and is not coarse, through which no one would be
angry, that one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 408
%
Whoever in the world does not take what is not
given, long, short, small, large, attractive or
unattractive, that one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 409
%
For the one who has no longings in this world or
in the next world, being without longings,
detached, that one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 410
%
For the one who has no desires, who, through
knowledge, is without doubt, who has reached
immersion in the deathless, that one I say is a
brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 411
%
Whoever here has overcome clinging to both merit
and demerit, who is griefless, dustless and pure,
that one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 412
%
Whoever just like the moon is stainless, pure,
clear and undisturbed, has destroyed joy in
existence, that one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 413
%
He who has crossed the difficult and dangerous
path through births and deaths and delusion, the
meditator who has crossed over to the further
shore, free of lust and free of doubt, unattached
and cooled down, that one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 414
%
Whoever, giving up sensual desires, would wander
homeless here, destroying desires and existence,
that one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 415
%
Whoever, giving up craving, would wander homeless
here, destroying craving and existence, that one I
say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 416
%
Abandoning the human yoke, overcoming the divine
yoke, being unattached to all yokes, that one I
say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 417
%
Abandoning delight and aversion, cooled off and
free from cleaving, a hero who vanquished the
whole world, that one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 418
%
Whoever knows in every way beings’ passing and
their rebirth, unattached, fortunate, awake, that
one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 419
%
For the one whose destiny is unknown to gods,
gandhabbas and men – being pollutant-free, an
Arahat, that one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 420
%
For whom there is nothing in the past, the future
or the present, having nothing and unattached,
that one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 421
%
A noble leader, heroic, a great seer, victorious,
free of lust, cleansed and awakened, that one I
say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 422
%
Whoever knows their former lives, and sees heaven
and the downfall, and has attained birth’s
destruction, the sage, accomplished in deep
knowledge, who is accomplished in all
accomplishments, that one I say is a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 423
%
