All phenomena are preceded by the mind, Created by
the mind, And have the mind as their master. If
one speaks or acts from a corrupted mind,
Suffering follows as the cart-wheel follows the
ox’s foot.

			 Dhammapada - 1
%
All phenomena are preceded by the mind, Created by
the mind, And have the mind as their master. If
one speaks or acts with a pure mind, Happiness
follows as an ever-present shadow.

			 Dhammapada - 2
%
He insulted me; he struck me; He defeated me; he
robbed me. For those who dwell on such
resentments, Enmity never ceases.

			 Dhammapada - 3
%
He insulted me; he struck me; He defeated me; he
robbed me. For those who do not dwell on such
resentments, Enmity subsides;

			 Dhammapada - 4
%
For enmities are never appeased by enmity. They
are appeased by peace. This is an eternal law.

			 Dhammapada - 5
%
But many do not realize that we all must die.
Those who do realize this appease their quarrels.

			 Dhammapada - 6
%
One who lives unrestrained in the senses And
focused on pleasant things, Who is immoderate in
food, Who is listless and lazy: Māra overcomes
him, Just as wind overcomes a weak tree.

			 Dhammapada - 7
%
One who lives restrained in the senses And focused
on unpleasant things, Who is moderate in food, Who
has faith and diligence: Māra cannot overcome him,
Just as wind cannot overcome a rocky mountain.

			 Dhammapada - 8
%
Whoever would take on the yellow robe, While
hampered by defilement, Being unrestrained and
without truth, Is unworthy of that yellow robe.

			 Dhammapada - 9
%
Whoever has thrown off defilement, Is well-
established in virtue, And is possessed with self-
control and truth, Is truly worthy of the yellow
robe.

			 Dhammapada - 10
%
Those who deem the worthless as valuable, And see
the valuable as worthless: They do not attain the
valuable; They roam in the field of wrong thought.

			 Dhammapada - 11
%
(But) those who have known the valuable as
valuable And see the worthless as worthless: They
attain the valuable; They roam in the field of
right thought.

			 Dhammapada - 12
%
Just as rain penetrates a poorly thatched house,
So passion penetrates an uncultivated mind.

			 Dhammapada - 13
%
Just as rain does not penetrate a well-thatched
house, So passion fails to penetrate a well-
cultivated mind.

			 Dhammapada - 14
%
Here he grieves, following death he grieves; In
both states the evil-doer grieves. He grieves, he
is afflicted, Having seen his defiled deeds.

			 Dhammapada - 15
%
Here he rejoices, following death he rejoices; In
both states he who has done good deeds rejoices.
He rejoices, he delights, Having seen his pure
deeds.

			 Dhammapada - 16
%
Here he is tormented, following death he is
tormented; In both states the evil-doer is
tormented. He is tormented knowing, “I have done
evil.” Reborn to a miserable state, he is
tormented all the more.

			 Dhammapada - 17
%
Here he rejoices, following death he rejoices; In
both states he who has done good deeds rejoices.
He rejoices knowing, “I have done good deeds.”
Reborn to a blissful state, he rejoices all the
more.

			 Dhammapada - 18
%
One who recites much scripture, But, being
negligent, does not act accordingly, Is like a
cowherd counting others’ cows, Having no share in
the fruits of monastic life.

			 Dhammapada - 19
%
One who recites little scripture, But lives in
truth according to the teaching, Having abandoned
lust, ill will, and delusion, Having right
knowledge and a well-emancipated mind, Not
clinging in this world or the next: He truly
shares the fruits of monastic life.

			 Dhammapada - 20
%
Vigilance is the path to the deathless state.
Negligence is the path to death. The vigilant do
not die; The negligent are as if already dead.

			 Dhammapada - 21
%
Knowing this distinction, Those wise in vigilance
rejoice therein, Delighting in the field of the
noble ones.

			 Dhammapada - 22
%
Absorbed in meditation, with perseverance and
constant effort, The wise touch Nibbāna, that
ultimate shelter from bondage.

			 Dhammapada - 23
%
For one who is vigilant and restrained, Who is
energetic and mindful, Who acts carefully and
purely, Who lives the Dhamma, Fame grows.

			 Dhammapada - 24
%
Through effort, vigilance, restraint, and self-
control, The wise one makes himself an island that
a flood could not overwhelm.

			 Dhammapada - 25
%
The ignorant and foolish give themselves to
negligence, While the wise protect vigilance as
the supreme treasure.

			 Dhammapada - 26
%
Do not give yourself to negligence Or be intimate
with sensual pleasure. Being meditative and
vigilant, One attains great happiness.

			 Dhammapada - 27
%
When the wise one expels negligence by vigilance,
Having ascended to the stronghold of wisdom, And
free from sorrow, He observes the sorrowing crowd,
As a sage, standing on a mountain, Observes fools
on the plain.

			 Dhammapada - 28
%
Vigilant among the negligent, Wide awake among the
sleeping, The deeply wise one goes forth, Like a
swift horse who leaves the nag behind.

			 Dhammapada - 29
%
By vigilance, Indra went to the highest seat among
the gods. Vigilance they praise; negligence is
ever-derided.

			 Dhammapada - 30
%
The monk, devoted to vigilance and seeing the
danger in negligence, Goes forth like a fire
burning every fetter, gross and subtle.

			 Dhammapada - 31
%
The monk, devoted to vigilance and seeing the
danger in negligence, Is close to Nibbāna and
cannot regress.

			 Dhammapada - 32
%
The mind is wavering and unsteady, Difficult to
guard, hard to restrain. The wise one sets it
straight, As a fletcher straightens the arrow’s
shaft.

			 Dhammapada - 33
%
Like a fish thrown on land from its home in the
water, This mind thrashes to escape Māra’s realm.

			 Dhammapada - 34
%
Good is the taming of the mind, So difficult to
control, so swift, Jumping toward what it desires.
The tamed mind brings happiness.

			 Dhammapada - 35
%
The wise should guard the mind, So difficult to
perceive, so subtle, Jumping at what it desires.
The protected mind brings happiness.

			 Dhammapada - 36
%
The mind wanders far and alone, Incorporeal and
resting in the cavern (of the body).  Those who
restrain it  will be released from Māra’s bonds.

			 Dhammapada - 37
%
Wisdom does not mature in one of unsteady mind And
drifting faith, Who knows not the true Dhamma.

			 Dhammapada - 38
%
For the one who is awake, Whose mind is neither
afflicted nor filled with desire, Who has
transcended merit and demerit, There is no fear.

			 Dhammapada - 39
%
Having understood this body as a clay pot, Having
established this mind as a fortress, One should
battle Māra with the sword of wisdom, And protect
what has been conquered, clinging to nothing.

			 Dhammapada - 40
%
Soon indeed, this body will lie on the earth,
Without consciousness, Cast away as a worthless
log.

			 Dhammapada - 41
%
Whatever an enemy would do to an enemy, A hater to
one hated, Worse than that is the harm that a
wrongly directed mind can do to itself.

			 Dhammapada - 42
%
Whatever mother, father, or other relative may do,
Better still, the good that a well-directed mind
can do for itself.

			 Dhammapada - 43
%
Who will conquer this earth, The worlds of Yama,
and those of the gods? Who will select a well-
taught Dhamma word, As an expert gardener selects
a flower?

			 Dhammapada - 44
%
The disciple will conquer this earth, The worlds
of Yama, and those of the gods. The disciple will
select the well-taught Dhamma word, As an expert
gardener selects a flower.

			 Dhammapada - 45
%
Knowing this body to be like foam, Realizing its
mirage-like nature, Cutting off the flowers of
Māra, One may go unseen by the King of Death.

			 Dhammapada - 46
%
The one with a clinging mind, Who is just
gathering flowers, Is carried away by death, As a
sleeping village is carried away by a great flood.

			 Dhammapada - 47
%
The one with a clinging mind, Who is only
gathering flowers, Is overpowered by death.

			 Dhammapada - 48
%
As a bee departing the flower, Having taken its
nectar, Does no harm to its color or fragrance, So
should a sage go through a village.

			 Dhammapada - 49
%
Do not attend to others’ wrong doings, What they
have done or failed to do. Attend only to
yourself, And what you have done and failed to do.

			 Dhammapada - 50
%
Like a beautiful flower That is full of color but
lacking fragrance, So too are well-said words,
Fruitless when not lived.

			 Dhammapada - 51
%
Like a beautiful flower That is full of color and
fragrant, So too are well-said words, Fruitful
when lived.

			 Dhammapada - 52
%
As many garland strands could be made from a heap
of flowers, So should one born mortal do much
good.

			 Dhammapada - 53
%
Neither the fragrance of the flower, Nor that of
sandalwood, tagara, or jasmine, Can go against the
wind, But the fragrance of the good does go
against the wind; It pervades all directions.

			 Dhammapada - 54
%
Sandalwood, tagara, jasmine, and lotus, Among
these perfumes the fragrance of virtue is
unbounded.

			 Dhammapada - 55
%
Faint is this fragrance of tagara and sandalwood,
But the scent of the virtuous one blows supreme;
It wafts even among the gods.

			 Dhammapada - 56
%
Māra does not find the tracks of those Consummate
in virtue, Who dwell in vigilance, And are freed
by perfect knowledge.

			 Dhammapada - 57
%
Just as from a rubbish heap on the roadside, A
lotus flower, so pure of smell and pleasing to the
mind, can grow;

			 Dhammapada - 58
%
So in the midst of the rubbish heap of blind,
ordinary people, A disciple of the Fully Awakened
One shines radiantly with wisdom.

			 Dhammapada - 59
%
Long is the night for the wakeful, Long is a trek
for the weary, Long is samsara for fools, Who do
not understand the true Dhamma.

			 Dhammapada - 60
%
If a traveler should not find another better or
equal to himself, Then he should resolutely travel
alone. With fools there is no companionship.

			 Dhammapada - 61
%
The fool worries: “I have sons, I have wealth.” He
does not even possess himself. How then sons? How
then wealth?

			 Dhammapada - 62
%
A fool who considers himself foolish is, In this,
like a sage. But a fool who is proud of his
cleverness Is truly called fool.

			 Dhammapada - 63
%
A fool who spends a lifetime attending on a sage,
Will not apprehend the Dhamma, Just as a spoon can
never know the soup’s flavor.

			 Dhammapada - 64
%
An intelligent person who attends on a sage, Even
for a moment, Will quickly apprehend the Dhamma,
Like the tongue perceiving the soup’s flavor.

			 Dhammapada - 65
%
Thoughtless fools act as their own enemies, Doing
evil deeds that bear bitter fruit.

			 Dhammapada - 66
%
That deed is not well-done, Which one regrets when
accomplished, Which results in crying and a tear-
streaked face.

			 Dhammapada - 67
%
That deed is well-done, Which one does not regret
when accomplished, Which results in delight and
joy.

			 Dhammapada - 68
%
As long as evil has not ripened, The fool thinks
it honey; When evil ripens, the fool suffers.

			 Dhammapada - 69
%
Though month after month He may eat his food with
the tip of the grass blade, The fool is not worth
a fraction Of one who has realized the Dhamma.

			 Dhammapada - 70
%
Indeed, like fresh milk, An evil deed does not
immediately curdle. Burning, it follows the fool,
Like a fire concealed by ashes.

			 Dhammapada - 71
%
Only to his detriment does knowledge arise in the
fool. It destroys his good fortune and splits his
head.

			 Dhammapada - 72
%
He seeks undue respect, honor among monks,
Authority in monasteries, and devotion by families
not his own.

			 Dhammapada - 73
%
“Let both householder and monk think that alone I
have done this, Let them be under my will in every
task.” So thinks the fool, whose desire and pride
grow.

			 Dhammapada - 74
%
There is one path to worldly gains, And a very
different path to Nibbāna. Let the monk who knows
this, The disciple of the Awakened One, Not
rejoice in honor, but cultivate solitude.

			 Dhammapada - 75
%
One ought to regard another who sees one’s faults,
And censures what should be censured, As a
revealer of treasures. One should associate with
such an intelligent and wise person, For such
company is always for the better.

			 Dhammapada - 76
%
He who would counsel, instruct, And restrain
another from base behavior Is dear to the good,
but displeasing to the bad.

			 Dhammapada - 77
%
Do not associate with bad friends. Do not
associate with depraved people. Associate with
virtuous friends. Associate with the best of
people.

			 Dhammapada - 78
%
One who drinks in the Dhamma sleeps happily With a
clear mind. The wise one ever-delights in the
Dhamma Proclaimed by the noble ones.

			 Dhammapada - 79
%
Irrigators guide water, Fletchers straighten the
shaft, Carpenters bend wood, The wise master
themselves.

			 Dhammapada - 80
%
Just as a solid rock is unmoved by the wind, So
the wise are unmoved by blame or praise.

			 Dhammapada - 81
%
Just as a deep lake is clear and undisturbed, So
the wise become clear, Having heard the teachings.

			 Dhammapada - 82
%
The good are not pleasure-lovers who seek idle
chatter; Always, they are detached. Though touched
by comfort and then by affliction, The wise
manifest no elation or depression.

			 Dhammapada - 83
%
One who would not want, for the sake of oneself or
another, A son, wealth, a kingdom, or unjust
success; This is one who is virtuous, wise, and
righteous.

			 Dhammapada - 84
%
Few are those who have gone to the other shore;
Many are those who run about on this side.

			 Dhammapada - 85
%
But those who live according to the well-taught
Dhamma Will go beyond the realm of death, so
difficult to cross.

			 Dhammapada - 86
%
Having abandoned the dark state, The wise one
cultivates the light; Having gone from home to
homelessness, He enters solitude, so difficult to
enjoy.

			 Dhammapada - 87
%
Owning nothing, having abandoned sense pleasures,
Having cleansed himself from mental defilements,
There, let the wise one wish for delight.

			 Dhammapada - 88
%
Those who have minds well-developed in the means
of awakening, Who, having removed the toxins,
delight in renouncing attachments: They are
radiant and completely emancipated in this world.

			 Dhammapada - 89
%
There is no fever for one Who has completed the
journey, Who is without sorrow, Who has abandoned
all fetters, Who is freed in every way.

			 Dhammapada - 90
%
Those who are mindful depart; They do not delight
in a house. They leave behind every home, Like
geese who abandon a pond.

			 Dhammapada - 91
%
The one who is not acquisitive, Who knows well the
role of food, Whose field is empty, unmarked
freedom, Is like a bird in the sky Whose
destination is difficult to discern.

			 Dhammapada - 92
%
The one who has destroyed all toxins, Who is
unattached to food, Whose field is empty, unmarked
freedom, Is like a bird in the sky Whose path is
difficult to discern.

			 Dhammapada - 93
%
One whose senses are as calm As horses well-tamed
by a charioteer, Who has abandoned pride and is
free from toxins, Is envied even by the gods.

			 Dhammapada - 94
%
For one who, like the earth, does not oppose, Who
is like a pillar of Indra, Who is deeply devout,
Who is like a deep unclouded pond, There is no
more wandering.

			 Dhammapada - 95
%
Calm is the mind, speech, and action Of such a one
freed by right understanding.

			 Dhammapada - 96
%
The one who is faithless [beyond believing], Who
is ungrateful [knows the Uncreated], Who is a
burglar [severs connections], Who destroys
opportunities [breaks the chain of rebirth], Who
is despondent [throws off desire]: This is the
ultimate person.

			 Dhammapada - 97
%
Whether in the village, forest, valley, or
highland, Wherever the arahants dwell is a place
of delight.

			 Dhammapada - 98
%
Delightful are the forests where few find delight.
There, those who seek no sensual pleasures, Who
are free of passion, will delight.

			 Dhammapada - 99
%
Better than a thousand vacuous statements Is one
meaningful word, Which, having been heard, brings
peace.

			 Dhammapada - 100
%
Better than a thousand vacuous verses Is one line
of verse, Which, having been heard, brings peace.

			 Dhammapada - 101
%
Better than a recitation of one hundred
meaningless verses is one Dhamma word, Which,
having been heard, brings peace.

			 Dhammapada - 102
%
Greater in battle than one who conquers thousands
upon thousands Is the one who conquers himself.

			 Dhammapada - 103
%
It is better to conquer oneself than others. For
the self-tamed one, ever-vigilant in self-control,

			 Dhammapada - 104
%
Neither a god nor a divine musician, Nor Māra and
Brahmā together, Could turn such a victory into
defeat.

			 Dhammapada - 105
%
Better than offering a thousand sacrifices, Month
after month for a hundred years, Is one moment’s
homage To one who has developed himself.

			 Dhammapada - 106
%
Better than one hundred years dwelling in the
forest And tending the sacred fire, Is one
moment’s homage To one who has developed himself.

			 Dhammapada - 107
%
Whatever offering or sacrifice in the world A
merit-seeker might offer for a year, All this is
not one-fourth the merit gained From showing
respect to the upright.

			 Dhammapada - 108
%
For one who is respectful, Who constantly reveres
the elders, Four things grow: life, beauty,
happiness, and strength.

			 Dhammapada - 109
%
Better than living one hundred years, Immoral and
ungrounded, Is living one day, Virtuous and
absorbed in meditation.

			 Dhammapada - 110
%
Better than living one hundred years, Foolish and
ungrounded, Is living one day, Wise and absorbed
in meditation.

			 Dhammapada - 111
%
Better than living one hundred years, Indolent and
slothful, Is living one day With steadfast vigor.

			 Dhammapada - 112
%
Better than living one hundred years Without
seeing arising and dissipation, Is living one day,
Seeing arising and dissipation.

			 Dhammapada - 113
%
Better than living one hundred years Without
seeing the deathless way, Is living one day,
Seeing the deathless way.

			 Dhammapada - 114
%
Better than living one hundred years Without
seeing the supreme Dhamma, Is living one day,
Seeing the supreme Dhamma.

			 Dhammapada - 115
%
Hasten to do good; Restrain your thoughts from
evil. When the mind is slow in doing good It
delights in evil.

			 Dhammapada - 116
%
Should one do evil, He should not do it again and
again. He ought not to desire this. Accumulated
evil brings great suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 117
%
Should one do good, He should do it again and
again. He ought to desire this. Accumulated good
brings great happiness.

			 Dhammapada - 118
%
An evil person sees benefit As long as the evil
has not ripened. When the evil does ripen, He
realizes misfortune.

			 Dhammapada - 119
%
Even a good person sees detriment Before the
goodness has ripened. When the good does ripen, He
realizes benefit.

			 Dhammapada - 120
%
Do not disregard evil, thinking, “It will not come
to me.” Even as falling drops of water can fill a
jug, So the fool becomes full of evil, Collecting
it little by little.

			 Dhammapada - 121
%
Do not disregard good, thinking, “It will not come
to me.” Even as falling drops of water can fill a
jug, So the wise one becomes full of goodness,
Collecting it little by little.

			 Dhammapada - 122
%
One should avoid evil deeds, As a merchant with
great wealth in a small caravan Avoids the
dangerous road, As one who desires life avoids
poison.

			 Dhammapada - 123
%
Without a wound, the hand can carry poison. With
no wound, the poison has no effect. So evil has no
effect for those who do not practice it.

			 Dhammapada - 124
%
As fine dust thrown against the wind, So does evil
return to the fool Who wrongs the innocent, the
faithful, and the pure.

			 Dhammapada - 125
%
Some arise in the womb; Evildoers arise in hell;
The righteous emerge in heaven; And those without
toxins enter final-Nibbāna.

			 Dhammapada - 126
%
There is no place in the world— Neither in the
sky, nor the ocean depth, Nor inside a mountain
cave— Where one would be free from one’s evil
deed.

			 Dhammapada - 127
%
There is no place in the world— Neither in the
sky, nor the ocean depth, Nor inside a mountain
cave— Where death is not victorious.

			 Dhammapada - 128
%
All tremble at a thrashing. All fear death.
Likening others to oneself, Do not kill or lead
another to kill.

			 Dhammapada - 129
%
All tremble at a thrashing. All hold life dear.
Likening others to oneself, Do not kill or lead
another to kill.

			 Dhammapada - 130
%
One who himself seeks happiness, And yet hurts
others who desire happiness, Will realize no
happiness after death.

			 Dhammapada - 131
%
One who himself seeks happiness, And does not hurt
others who desire happiness, Will realize
happiness after death.

			 Dhammapada - 132
%
To none speak harshly. Those spoken to would
respond in kind. Contentious speech is painful;
Retaliation would befall you.

			 Dhammapada - 133
%
If, like a broken gong, You yourself are
unstirred, You have attained Nibbāna, And no
contention exists within.

			 Dhammapada - 134
%
Just as a cowherd drives a cow to pasture with a
stick, So old age and death drive the life of
sentient beings.

			 Dhammapada - 135
%
A fool does not recognize his own evil act. Devoid
of wisdom, he is tormented by his actions, As one
burned by fire.

			 Dhammapada - 136
%
One who does violence to the innocent and
peaceable Will quickly encounter one of ten
states:

			 Dhammapada - 137
%
Intense pain, destitution, bodily injury, disease
of body, disease of mind,

			 Dhammapada - 138
%
Oppression from the king, cruel slander, loss of
relatives, loss of wealth,

			 Dhammapada - 139
%
Loss of houses by fire; And after death, such a
one, so devoid of wisdom, will be reborn in hell.

			 Dhammapada - 140
%
Neither nakedness nor matted hair, Neither a mud-
smeared body nor fasting, Neither lying on the
ground, nor dust and sweat, Nor sitting on one’s
heels, Can purify one who has not overcome doubt.

			 Dhammapada - 141
%
Even if one would walk around luxuriously attired,
If one is tranquil, tame, self-restrained, and
living a holy life, Having renounced violence
toward any living being, Such is a brahmin, a
renunciant, a monk.

			 Dhammapada - 142
%
Where in this world exists One who is restrained
by conscience and avoids blame, As a good horse
avoids the whip?

			 Dhammapada - 143
%
Be like a good horse when touched by the whip—
ardent and alarmed. Through strength, virtue, and
vigor, Through concentration and investigation of
truth, Mindful and possessed of right knowledge
and conduct, You will leave this great suffering
behind.

			 Dhammapada - 144
%
Irrigators guide water; Fletchers straighten
shafts; Carpenters bend wood; The well-practiced
master themselves.

			 Dhammapada - 145
%
Why laughter, why joy, While ever-aflame? Covered
in darkness, Do you not seek the light?

			 Dhammapada - 146
%
Look at this beautified image, with many plans— A
diseased mass of sores that has no permanence.

			 Dhammapada - 147
%
This body, a nest of illness that is wasted away,
This foul mass breaks up, For truly life ends in
death.

			 Dhammapada - 148
%
On seeing these gray bones, Scattered like gourds
in autumn— What is the fondness?

			 Dhammapada - 149
%
It (the body) is a city made of bones, plastered
in flesh and blood, Where old age, death, conceit,
and hypocrisy are stored.

			 Dhammapada - 150
%
Even the king’s chariots, so splendidly adorned,
decay. Alas, the body too decays. But the Dhamma
of the good does not age; Indeed, the good declare
it to one another.

			 Dhammapada - 151
%
He of little learning grows old like an ox; His
bulk increases, but his wisdom does not.

			 Dhammapada - 152
%
Through many rounds of birth have I run, Seeking
and not finding the builder of this house. Painful
is birth, again and again.

			 Dhammapada - 153
%
House-builder you are seen! You will build no
more! Your rafters are broken, the roof destroyed.
The mind, having gone to the Unconditioned, Has
attained the destruction of craving.

			 Dhammapada - 154
%
Not having lived a holy life, Not having obtained
wealth in youth, They brood, Like old herons in a
lake without fish.

			 Dhammapada - 155
%
Not having lived a holy life, Not having attained
wealth in their youth, They lie like arrows shot
from a bow, Lamenting the past.

			 Dhammapada - 156
%
If one would know oneself as dear, One would keep
oneself well-protected. The wise man should guard
himself Throughout the three watches of the night.

			 Dhammapada - 157
%
One should first establish oneself in what is
proper. Then only could the wise man instruct
others and remain unstained.

			 Dhammapada - 158
%
If one would only do oneself what one instructs
others to do! Then, well-restrained, he would
well-train others. Truly, training oneself is most
difficult.

			 Dhammapada - 159
%
Truly oneself is one’s own protector. What other
protector could there be? Only by being well-
trained oneself Does one obtain the true
protector, so hard to gain.

			 Dhammapada - 160
%
By oneself is evil done; It proceeds from oneself,
it originates from oneself. It crushes the fool,
Like a diamond crushes a precious stone.

			 Dhammapada - 161
%
He who covers himself with depraved conduct, Like
a creeper covers a sala tree, Does to himself what
an enemy desires for him.

			 Dhammapada - 162
%
It is easy to do wrong, So harmful to oneself. It
is indeed most difficult to do good, So beneficial
to oneself.

			 Dhammapada - 163
%
He who scorns the teaching of the arahants, Those
nobles who live the Dhamma, Is the fool who relies
on evil views. Like the fruit of a bamboo, he
ripens to self- destruction.

			 Dhammapada - 164
%
By oneself alone is evil done, by oneself one
becomes defiled. Evil is undone by oneself, by
oneself alone can one become cleansed. Purity and
impurity arise from oneself. No one can purify
another.

			 Dhammapada - 165
%
Neglect not your own welfare for another’s,
However great. If you fully understood your own
welfare, You would pursue the true attainment.

			 Dhammapada - 166
%
Do not follow an inferior teaching; Do not live by
negligence; Do not embrace wrong views; Do not be
a world-enhancer.

			 Dhammapada - 167
%
Arise and be not negligent. Follow the Dhamma,
practice well. Happy the one who dwells in Dhamma,
Both in this world and in the next.

			 Dhammapada - 168
%
Practice the Dhamma well, not poorly. Happy the
one who dwells in Dhamma, Both in this world and
in the next.

			 Dhammapada - 169
%
Look upon the world as a bubble; Look upon the
world as a mirage. One who looks thus is unseen by
the king of Death.

			 Dhammapada - 170
%
Come, look at this world as an adorned king’s
chariot. While fools sink down, the discriminating
are free.

			 Dhammapada - 171
%
One who was once negligent but becomes diligent,
Illumines the world, Like a moon released from a
cloud.

			 Dhammapada - 172
%
One whose evil conduct is replaced by good,
Illumines the world, Like a moon released from a
cloud.

			 Dhammapada - 173
%
Blind is this world where few see clearly. As
birds who escape from the snare are few, So too
are those who go to a higher plane.

			 Dhammapada - 174
%
Geese travel by the path of the sun, By power they
move through the sky. The wise are led from the
world, Having conquered Māra and his army.

			 Dhammapada - 175
%
Of the one who has transgressed the law, Rejected
the world beyond, And speaks falsely: There is no
evil that he could not do.

			 Dhammapada - 176
%
Truly, the selfish do not enter the realm of the
gods. Fools do not praise generosity. But the wise
one, rejoicing in generosity, Is thereby happy in
the next world.

			 Dhammapada - 177
%
Over sole sovereignty of the earth, Or going to a
heaven, Or lordship over all worlds, The fruit of
stream-winner is supreme.

			 Dhammapada - 178
%
He whose victory cannot be undone, A conquest no
one in the world can pursue: This is the Buddha,
trackless in an endless field. By what path would
you guide him?

			 Dhammapada - 179
%
The one who has no snare, No craving, no thirst to
carry him anywhere: This is the Buddha, trackless
in an endless field. By what path would you guide
him?

			 Dhammapada - 180
%
The wise, intent on meditation, Delighting in
renunciation and calm, Wholly awakened and
mindful: Even the gods envy them.

			 Dhammapada - 181
%
Difficult it is to gain a human birth; Difficult
is the life of mortals; Difficult is the chance to
hear the true Dhamma; Difficult is the arising of
Buddhas.

			 Dhammapada - 182
%
Doing no evil, Undertaking the good, Purifying
one’s mind: This is the teaching of the Buddhas.

			 Dhammapada - 183
%
One who hurts another is no monk. One who harms
another is no renunciant. Patience and endurance
make the highest asceticism. The Buddhas teach
that Nibbāna is supreme.

			 Dhammapada - 184
%
Not disparaging or hurting others, Restrained by
the precepts, moderate in food, Dwelling in
solitude, pursuing high states of mind: This is
the teaching of the Buddhas.

			 Dhammapada - 185
%
Not even by a rain of coins would people have
their fill of sense pleasures. The wise one knows
they satisfy little and cause pain.

			 Dhammapada - 186
%
He does not even delight in heavenly pleasures.
The disciple of the Wholly Awakened One is devoted
to craving’s destruction.

			 Dhammapada - 187
%
People driven by fear seek many refuges, Whether
mountains, forests, or shrine parks.

			 Dhammapada - 188
%
But such a refuge is not safe, surely not supreme.
Arriving at such a refuge, one is not free from
all suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 189
%
But one who has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the
Dhamma, and the Sangha, Sees, with true wisdom,
the Four Noble Truths:

			 Dhammapada - 190
%
Suffering, the origin of suffering, the overcoming
of suffering, And the Eightfold Path leading to
the cessation of suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 191
%
Truly, this refuge is safe, this refuge is
supreme. Having come to this refuge, one is truly
freed from all suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 192
%
A remarkable man is hard to find; He is not born
everywhere. Where such a wise one is born His
family happily flourishes.

			 Dhammapada - 193
%
Happy the birth of the Buddhas; Happy the teaching
of the true Dhamma; Happy the harmony of the
Sangha; Happy the austere practice of those in
harmony.

			 Dhammapada - 194
%
If one venerates those worthy of veneration,
Buddhas or their disciples, Beings who have
transcended proliferations And passed beyond grief
and sorrow,

			 Dhammapada - 195
%
Beings who are free and fear nothing— If one
venerates such beings, the merit cannot be
measured.

			 Dhammapada - 196
%
So very happily we live, Without hostility among
the hostile. Among the hostile, we dwell
peaceably.

			 Dhammapada - 197
%
So very happily we live, Healthy among the ill.
Among the ill, we dwell in health.

			 Dhammapada - 198
%
So very happily we live, Without ambition among
the ambitious. Among the ambitious, we dwell
without ambition.

			 Dhammapada - 199
%
So very happily we live, We who possess nothing.
We will feed on delight, Like the radiant gods.

			 Dhammapada - 200
%
Victory gives birth to enmity. The defeated lie in
suffering. Having renounced victory and defeat,
The calm one rests at ease.

			 Dhammapada - 201
%
There is no fire like passion. There is no evil
like ill will. There is no suffering like the
aggregates. There is no happiness higher than
peace.

			 Dhammapada - 202
%
Hunger is the greatest illness. Conditioned things
are the greatest suffering. For the one who knows
reality as it is, Nibbāna is the supreme
happiness.

			 Dhammapada - 203
%
Health is the finest possession. Contentment is
the greatest wealth. Those trusted are the best
relatives. Nibbāna is the supreme happiness.

			 Dhammapada - 204
%
Having drunk the nectar of solitude and
tranquility, One becomes free of evil and fear,
Drinking the nectar of Dhamma delight.

			 Dhammapada - 205
%
Seeing the noble ones is good; Their company is
always pleasant. Free from seeing fools, One would
be happy always.

			 Dhammapada - 206
%
By associating with fools one grieves a long time.
Living with fools is like living with an enemy;
always afflictive. Living with the wise is like a
gathering of relatives; always a joy.

			 Dhammapada - 207
%
Therefore: Follow the good, the intelligent, One
clever, wise, learned, committed in virtue, well-
practicing, and noble, As the moon follows the
path of stars.

			 Dhammapada - 208
%
One who pursues what is not to be undertaken, And
practices what is not to be practiced, Who clings
to what is dear, having abandoned the goal: Such a
one envies those who apply themselves.

			 Dhammapada - 209
%
Never associate with those dear or abrasive. For
not seeing those dear and seeing the abrasive are
both painful.

			 Dhammapada - 210
%
Therefore hold nothing dear, For separation from
what is dear is bad. For one whom there is neither
dear nor non-dear, There are no bonds.

			 Dhammapada - 211
%
From affection grief is born. From affection fear
is born. One free from affection is without grief;
From where would fear come?

			 Dhammapada - 212
%
From love grief is born. From love fear is born.
One free from love is without grief; From where
would fear come?

			 Dhammapada - 213
%
From attachment grief is born. From attachment
fear is born. One free from attachment is without
grief; From where would fear come?

			 Dhammapada - 214
%
From sensual craving grief is born. From sensual
craving fear is born. One free from sensual
craving is without grief; From where would fear
come?

			 Dhammapada - 215
%
From craving grief is born. From craving fear is
born. One free from craving is without grief; From
where would fear come?

			 Dhammapada - 216
%
People hold dear the one endowed with virtue and
insight, Who speaks the truth and does the work
that that is his, Who is established in the
Dhamma.

			 Dhammapada - 217
%
One with an expansive mind, Who is intent on the
Indescribable, Whose heart is not bound with
sensual craving, is called going upstream.

			 Dhammapada - 218
%
Family, companions, and friends rejoice When one,
long absent, safely returns.

			 Dhammapada - 219
%
Just so, in going from this world to the next, The
good deeds receive the well-doer, As relatives
receive the return of their dear one.

			 Dhammapada - 220
%
Abandon anger, give up pride, Overcome every
fetter. For afflictions do not beset one who has
nothing, Who is unattached to mind and body.

			 Dhammapada - 221
%
The one who would restrain anger as it arises,
Like a careening chariot, I proclaim a true
charioteer, While another just holds the reins.

			 Dhammapada - 222
%
Conquer anger with conciliation, Evil with good,
Stinginess with giving, And a liar with the truth.

			 Dhammapada - 223
%
Speak the truth, Have no anger, Give when asked,
even from little. By these three, would you enter
the presence of the gods.

			 Dhammapada - 224
%
The wise do no harm, Ever-restrained in body.
Having gone to the Unshakable State, They grieve
no more.

			 Dhammapada - 225
%
For those who are always awake, Learning day and
night, Intent on Nibbāna, The toxins disappear.

			 Dhammapada - 226
%
O Atula, this is not new but very old: They
criticize one who sits silently, they criticize
one who talks much, And they criticize one who
speaks moderately. No one in the world goes
uncriticized.

			 Dhammapada - 227
%
There was not, is not, and never will be A person
wholly criticized or wholly praised.

			 Dhammapada - 228
%
Who is worthy to reprove the one Whom the
intelligent, having examined day after day,
praise,

			 Dhammapada - 229
%
Whose conduct is faultless, Who is intelligent,
endowed with wisdom and virtue, Who is like a coin
of fine gold: Even the gods praise him; Even by
Brahmā he is praised.

			 Dhammapada - 230
%
Guard yourself from violence; In body, be
restrained. Having now renounced this physical
misconduct, Act properly with the body.

			 Dhammapada - 231
%
Guard yourself from angry speech; In speech, be
restrained. Having now renounced this verbal
misconduct, Act properly with speech.

			 Dhammapada - 232
%
Guard yourself against an angry mind; In mind, be
restrained. Having now renounced this mental
misconduct, Act properly with the mind.

			 Dhammapada - 233
%
The wise who are restrained in body, restrained in
speech, And restrained in mind, are indeed
thoroughly restrained.

			 Dhammapada - 234
%
You are now like a yellowed leaf. Even Yama’s men
have come for you. You stand at the mouth of
death, With no provisions for the journey.

			 Dhammapada - 235
%
Make an island for yourself. Strive quickly. Be
wise. Clear, with impurities removed, You will
enter the divine realm of the noble ones.

			 Dhammapada - 236
%
And now, with life almost finished, You have
entered into Yama’s presence. There is no place to
rest in between; There are no provisions for the
journey.

			 Dhammapada - 237
%
Make an island for yourself. Strive quickly. Be
wise. Clear, with impurities removed, You will not
come to birth and old age again.

			 Dhammapada - 238
%
Like a metal-smith who, Little-by-little, moment-
by-moment, Cleanses dross from silver, So too the
wise one cleanses his impurities gradually.

			 Dhammapada - 239
%
Just as rust eats the iron from which it has
arisen, So the monk who lives excessively Is led
by his own deeds into a woeful rebirth.

			 Dhammapada - 240
%
Sacred texts are profaned by non-recitation;
Houses are broken down by neglect; Beauty is
compromised by sloth; And vigilance is undermined
by negligence.

			 Dhammapada - 241
%
Bad conduct is the impurity of a woman.
Stinginess, the impurity of a giver. Impurities
are evil things, In this world and in the next.

			 Dhammapada - 242
%
More impure than these is ignorance, This is the
supreme impurity. Having renounced this impurity,
O monks, be pure.

			 Dhammapada - 243
%
Easy to live is the life of the shameless, The
unconscientious, offensive, pushy, reckless, and
corrupt.

			 Dhammapada - 244
%
Hard to live is the life of one with conscience,
Who always strives to be pure, Who is open,
careful, perceptive, and clean-living.

			 Dhammapada - 245
%
Whoever kills a living being, Speaks falsely,
Takes whatever in the world is not given, Goes to
another’s wife,

			 Dhammapada - 246
%
And gives himself to drinking liquor, Uproots
himself in this very world.

			 Dhammapada - 247
%
Know this friend: evil things are reckless. Let
not greed and injustice subject you to long
suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 248
%
People give according to their faith, according to
their trust. The one who is disconcerted by
others’ food and drink, Will never attain samādhi,
neither by day nor by night.

			 Dhammapada - 249
%
But one who has cut off, destroyed at the root,
And removed this consternation, Will attain
samādhi, day or night.

			 Dhammapada - 250
%
There is no fire like passion; There is no fetter
like ill will; There is no snare like delusion;
There is no river like craving.

			 Dhammapada - 251
%
It is easy to see the faults of others, But truly
difficult to see one’s own. One sifts out the
faults of others like chaff, But conceals one’s
own, As a deceitful gambler conceals a corrupt
dice throw.

			 Dhammapada - 252
%
The one who finds faults with others, Always
watching and critical: His toxins only grow ever-
farther from their dissolution.

			 Dhammapada - 253
%
There are no tracks in the sky; The renunciant is
not outside; People delight in impediments; The
Tathāgatas are without impediments.

			 Dhammapada - 254
%
There are no tracks in the sky; The renunciant is
not outside; No conditioned things are eternal;
Unshaken are the Buddhas.

			 Dhammapada - 255
%
One who hastily assesses what is good Is not
established in Dhamma. The wise one investigates
both good and bad,

			 Dhammapada - 256
%
And judges others thoughtfully, justly, and
impartially. This intelligent one, this protector
of the Dhamma, Is called established in the
Dhamma.

			 Dhammapada - 257
%
One is not wise in virtue of speaking much. One
who is called wise is peaceful, friendly, and
fearless.

			 Dhammapada - 258
%
One does not uphold the Dhamma simply by many
words. One upholds the Dhamma when it is not
neglected; When, having heard but a little,
observes it with one’s own body.

			 Dhammapada - 259
%
One is not an elder just by a gray head. Ripe only
in years, he is called grown old in vain.

			 Dhammapada - 260
%
But one in whom there is truth and Dhamma, Non-
violence, restraint, and moderation, With
impurities discarded, This wise one is truly
called elder.

			 Dhammapada - 261
%
Not by eloquence or lotus-like beauty, does one
who is envious, selfish, and deceitful, become
exemplary.

			 Dhammapada - 262
%
The wise one who has cut off, destroyed at the
root, and removed these; Who has discarded ill
will altogether; This one is called exemplary.

			 Dhammapada - 263
%
Not by a bald head is one a renunciant— One who
does not observe the precepts, who lies. What
renunciant is possessed by longing and greed!

			 Dhammapada - 264
%
But one who subdues evil thoroughly, whether big
or small, Is by so doing truly called renunciant.

			 Dhammapada - 265
%
One is not a monk just by begging from another.
Having undertaken a foul tradition, one is not
then a monk.

			 Dhammapada - 266
%
But the one who sets aside both merit and demerit,
who leads a holy life, Who lives in the world
perceptively, This one is truly is called monk.

			 Dhammapada - 267
%
One deluded and ignorant is not a sage by silence.
But one who takes up the best as if holding a
scale is wise.

			 Dhammapada - 268
%
One who avoids evils thereby is a sage. One who
knows both best and worst in the world is thereby
called sage.

			 Dhammapada - 269
%
One is not a noble by hurting living beings. One
who is gentle to all beings is thereby called
noble.

			 Dhammapada - 270
%
Neither by precept and virtue, nor by great
learning; Neither by attaining samādhi, nor
inhabiting a solitary dwelling;

			 Dhammapada - 271
%
Nor by thinking, “I touch the happiness of
renunciation, unknown to the ordinary,” Do you, O
monk, find contentment, If you have not attained
the dissolution of the toxins.

			 Dhammapada - 272
%
Of paths, the eightfold is supreme; Of truths, the
four proclamations; Of mental states, dispassion;
Of people, the truly perceptive.

			 Dhammapada - 273
%
Only this is the path; There is no other for
purity of vision. Follow this, the path that
bewilders Māra.

			 Dhammapada - 274
%
Following this path, You will truly put an end to
suffering. This is the path I have proclaimed,
Having known the arrow’s removal.

			 Dhammapada - 275
%
The effort must be done by you. The tathāgatas are
only proclaimers. Following the path, those
absorbed in meditation Will be freed from Māra’s
bonds.

			 Dhammapada - 276
%
When one perceives with wisdom That all
conditioned things are impermanent, Then one
wearies of suffering. This is the path to purity.

			 Dhammapada - 277
%
When one perceives with wisdom That all
conditioned things are suffering, Then one wearies
of suffering. This is the path to purity.

			 Dhammapada - 278
%
When one perceives with wisdom That all things are
without self, Then one wearies of suffering. This
is the path to purity.

			 Dhammapada - 279
%
The one who is inactive at a time for exertion,
Who though young and strong is slothful, Who is
lazy, lethargic, Whose mind’s resolves are
exhausted; Such a one will not find the path of
wisdom.

			 Dhammapada - 280
%
Guarded in speech, restrained in mind and body, Do
nothing unwholesome. Purify these three ways of
action, And complete the path proclaimed by the
wise.

			 Dhammapada - 281
%
From practice wisdom arises; From lack of practice
wisdom is lost. Having recognized this twofold
path of development and decline, Establish
yourself so that wisdom grows.

			 Dhammapada - 282
%
Cut down the entire forest (of passion), not just
one tree. From the forest, fear is born. Having
cut down the forest and underbrush, O monks, be
deforested.

			 Dhammapada - 283
%
As long as the underbrush (of passion) is not cut
down, And even the smallest amount of sexual
passion remains, One’s mind remains tethered, Like
a calf sucking milk from its mother.

			 Dhammapada - 284
%
Cut off affection for self, As you would an autumn
lotus with your hand. Cultivate the path of
tranquility, To Nibbāna, taught by the Well-Gone
One.

			 Dhammapada - 285
%
“Here I will stay during the rains, Here for
winter and summer,” so thinks the fool. He does
not recognize the danger.

			 Dhammapada - 286
%
Death takes that man with mind attached,
Intoxicated by sons and cattle, Like a great flood
takes a sleeping village.

			 Dhammapada - 287
%
There are no sons for protection, or father or
even kin, There is no protection in relatives for
one seized by death.

			 Dhammapada - 288
%
Knowing this, governed by virtue, The wise should
quickly clear the path leading to Nibbāna.

			 Dhammapada - 289
%
If by renouncing a small happiness One could see a
great happiness, Then, let the wise one, seeing
the great happiness, Renounce the small happiness.

			 Dhammapada - 290
%
One who, contaminated by anger, Would seek
happiness at the expense of another’s affliction,
Is hostility’s prisoner.

			 Dhammapada - 291
%
The toxins increase for the proud and negligent.
They reject what should be done And do what should
not be done.

			 Dhammapada - 292
%
But those who are well-resolved, ever-mindful of
the body, Who do not practice what should not be
done, But persevere in what should be done; For
those, mindful and knowing, the toxins dissipate.

			 Dhammapada - 293
%
Having slain mother, father, And two warrior
kings; Having slain the kingdom and its subjects,
The brahmin, undisturbed, proceeds.

			 Dhammapada - 294
%
Having slain mother, father, And two learned
kings, with a tiger as fifth, The brahmin,
undisturbed, proceeds.

			 Dhammapada - 295
%
The disciples of Gotama, They awaken well-awake,
As their mindfulness, day and night, Is ever-
directed to the Buddha.

			 Dhammapada - 296
%
The disciples of Gotama, They awaken well-awake,
Their mindfulness, day and night, Is ever-directed
to the Dhamma.

			 Dhammapada - 297
%
The disciples of Gotama, They awaken well-awake.
Their mindfulness, day and night, Is ever-directed
to the Sangha.

			 Dhammapada - 298
%
The disciples of Gotama, They awaken well-awake.
Their mindfulness, day and night, Is ever-directed
to the body.

			 Dhammapada - 299
%
The disciples of Gotama, They awaken well-awake.
Their mind, day and night, Is ever-devoted to non-
violence.

			 Dhammapada - 300
%
The disciples of Gotama, They awaken well-awake.
Their mind, day and night, Is ever-devoted to
meditation.

			 Dhammapada - 301
%
Difficult it is to go forth, difficult to delight
thus. Difficult it is to inhabit households, which
are afflictive. Painful is the company of people
so different. Suffering afflicts a traveler. So be
neither a traveler nor befallen by suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 302
%
The one who is faithful, endowed in virtue,
Possessed of fame and wealth— Wherever he goes, he
is honored.

			 Dhammapada - 303
%
The good are seen from afar, Like snowy mountains.
The bad are unseen here, Like arrows shot into the
night.

			 Dhammapada - 304
%
Sitting alone, resting alone, Roaming alone,
keenly attentive, Mastering himself in solitude:
Such a one would delight in the forest.

			 Dhammapada - 305
%
One who claims what is not so goes to hell; So
also one having done something who says, “I did
not do this.” Both do base deeds, and both are
equal after death in the other world.

			 Dhammapada - 306
%
Many in saffron robes are unrestrained with evil
character. By evil deeds these wicked ones are
reborn in hell.

			 Dhammapada - 307
%
Better to eat an iron ball, hot like a fire’s
point, Than if one, immoral and unrestrained,
Would eat the country’s alms food.

			 Dhammapada - 308
%
The negligent man, who pursues the wife of
another, Encounters four conditions: accumulation
of demerit, An unpleasant bed, reproach, and
finally hell.

			 Dhammapada - 309
%
So, a man ought not resort to another’s wife,
Accumulating demerit, a bad destination, and the
king’s harsh punishment. Little is the delight of
a fearful man with a fearful woman.

			 Dhammapada - 310
%
Just as wrongly grasped kusa grass cuts the hand,
So the renunciant life, wrongly handled, pulls
toward hell.

			 Dhammapada - 311
%
A lax action, an impure observance, A dubious holy
life: This is hardly fruitful.

			 Dhammapada - 312
%
Do what ought to be done, Undertake it firmly. The
lax religious life simply scatters more dust.

			 Dhammapada - 313
%
An evil deed is better not done. Such a deed
torments one later. A good deed is better done,
Which, when done, does not cause regret.

			 Dhammapada - 314
%
Just as a border city is protected inside and out,
So you ought to guard yourself. Let not a moment
escape. They who let the moment pass grieve When
consigned to hell.

			 Dhammapada - 315
%
Ashamed of what is not shameful, And not ashamed
of what is shameful; Those undertaking wrong view
Go to a miserable destination.

			 Dhammapada - 316
%
Being afraid of what is not frightful, And being
unafraid of the frightful, Those undertaking wrong
view Go to a miserable destination.

			 Dhammapada - 317
%
Imagining fault in the faultless, And perceiving
no fault in the sinful, Those undertaking wrong
view Go to a miserable existence.

			 Dhammapada - 318
%
Having known fault as fault And faultless as
faultless, Those undertaking right view Go to a
favorable destination.

			 Dhammapada - 319
%
As an elephant in battle endures arrows shot from
bows, So shall I endure insult. Truly, the masses
are immoral.

			 Dhammapada - 320
%
It is the tamed one they lead into the crowd. It
is the tamed one that the king mounts. Among
humans, best is the tamed one Who endures insult.

			 Dhammapada - 321
%
Excellent are tamed mules, Thoroughbred horses of
Sindh, and great elephants, tuskers. More
excellent than these is the one who tames himself.

			 Dhammapada - 322
%
For not by these mounts could one go to the
unreached region, As one tamed goes well-tamed.

			 Dhammapada - 323
%
A tusker named Dhanapālaka, Bound, difficult to
restrain, and rutting, Does not eat even a morsel;
He longs for the elephant grove.

			 Dhammapada - 324
%
The sluggish and gluttonous, The sleeper, who lies
rolling around, Being dull like a great boar
nourished on fodder, Undergoes rebirth again and
again.

			 Dhammapada - 325
%
Formerly, this mind went wandering as it wished,
According to its desire and pleasure. Today, I
will restrain it thoroughly, As an elephant driver
subdues a rutting elephant.

			 Dhammapada - 326
%
Be devoted to vigilance; Guard your mind. Raise
yourself from the bad path, Like a tusker sunk in
mud.

			 Dhammapada - 327
%
If you should find an intelligent companion, A
fellow-traveler who is wise and virtuous, You
should journey together, joyful and mindful,
Overcoming all dangers.

			 Dhammapada - 328
%
If you should not find an intelligent companion, A
fellow-traveler who is wise and virtuous, Then
journey alone, Like a king who has abandoned a
conquered kingdom, Like the elephant in the
Mātaṅga forest.

			 Dhammapada - 329
%
It is better to travel alone; there is no
companionship with a fool. Go alone, wanting
little, and doing no wrong, Like the elephant in
the Mātaṅga forest.

			 Dhammapada - 330
%
Happy are friends when need arises. Happy is
contentment in whatever is. Happy is a meritorious
deed at the end of life. Happy is the abandonment
of suffering altogether.

			 Dhammapada - 331
%
Happy in this world is reverence toward one’s
mother, And reverence for one’s father as well.
Happy in this world is reverence toward a
renunciant. Happy is respect for the brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 332
%
Happy is virtue through old age. Happy is a firmly
established faith. Happy is the attainment of
wisdom. Happy is doing no wrong.

			 Dhammapada - 333
%
The craving of the careless one grows like a
creeper. The craver jumps from existence to
existence, Like a monkey seeking fruit in the
forest.

			 Dhammapada - 334
%
One who is conquered by this miserable craving,
This clinging in the world: His sorrows grow like
bīraṇa grass after rain.

			 Dhammapada - 335
%
But one who conquers this miserable craving, So
difficult to overcome in the world: His sorrows
fall away, like drops of water from a lotus.

			 Dhammapada - 336
%
I say to you: Good fortune to all assembled here!
Uproot the root of craving, As one would who
desires the fragrant root of the bīraṇa grass. Let
not Māra crush you, as a torrent crushes a reed,
Again and again and again.

			 Dhammapada - 337
%
Just as a tree cut down will grow again When the
root remains healthy and strong, So this suffering
arises again and again When dormant craving is not
destroyed.

			 Dhammapada - 338
%
The wrong-viewed person, The one in whom the
thirty-six streams of craving flow mightily, Is
carried away by these currents, These thoughts
dependent on passion.

			 Dhammapada - 339
%
Streams flow everywhere. The creeper, having
sprung up, establishes itself. Seeing that the
creeper has emerged, Use wisdom to cut it off at
the root.

			 Dhammapada - 340
%
Delights, flowing along and filled with lust,
arise in people. Surely, those intent on
enjoyment, seeking pleasure, Undergo birth and old
age.

			 Dhammapada - 341
%
Encircled by craving, People run around like
ensnared hares. Bound by the fetters of
attachment. They undergo long suffering again and
again.

			 Dhammapada - 342
%
Encircled by craving, People run around like
ensnared hares. Therefore, one who desires
dispassion Should dispel craving.

			 Dhammapada - 343
%
Who, for the sake of being free from the forest
(of craving), Is resolved upon the forest (of
solitude), And then runs back to the forest (of
craving); Come and see one freed who runs back
into bondage!

			 Dhammapada - 344
%
The fetter made of iron, of wood, or of babbaja
grass, Is not so strong, say the wise. But
infatuation with jewels and ornaments, Or longing
for sons and wives,

			 Dhammapada - 345
%
That is a strong bond, say the wise, Loose, yet
difficult to be freed from. When the bond is cut,
they go about, Free from longing, Having abandoned
sensual pleasure.

			 Dhammapada - 346
%
Those excited by passion fall into the current, As
a spider caught in its self-made web. Having cut
off this passion, the wise set forth, Free from
longing, Having abandoned all suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 347
%
Let go of the past, let go of the future, let go
of the present. Gone to the other shore of
existence, With mind everywhere emancipated, You
will not again come to birth and old age.

			 Dhammapada - 348
%
For the one with disturbed thoughts and intense
passion, Who is focused on pleasant things,
Craving only grows stronger. Indeed, craving
fortifies the fetter.

			 Dhammapada - 349
%
For the one devoted to calming thoughts, always
mindful, Who meditates on what is foul: That one
will make an end and cut off Māra’s bond.

			 Dhammapada - 350
%
One who has attained perfection, Who is pure,
without craving or fear: This one has destroyed
the arrows of becoming; His present body, the
last.

			 Dhammapada - 351
%
One who is without craving, free of grasping,
Skilled in the scriptures, who would know their
arrangement; Such a one is truly called great
person; Such a one possesses great wisdom; Such a
one is living his final life.

			 Dhammapada - 352
%
I know all; I overcome all. Free of stain in all
conditions, Abandoning everything, Emancipated by
the dissolution of craving, I have understood
everything on my own.

			 Dhammapada - 353
%
The gift of Dhamma overwhelms all gifts. The taste
of Dhamma overwhelms all tastes. The delight of
Dhamma overwhelms all delights. The dissolution of
craving overwhelms all suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 354
%
Wealth wounds those lacking wisdom, Not those
seeking the other shore. Craving wealth, those who
lack wisdom Destroy others, even as themselves.

			 Dhammapada - 355
%
Fields are ruined by weeds; Humanity is ruined by
passions. But indeed what is given to those whose
passions are gone Bears great fruit.

			 Dhammapada - 356
%
Fields are ruined by weeds; Humanity is ruined by
ill will. But indeed what is given to those whose
ill will is gone Bears great fruit.

			 Dhammapada - 357
%
Fields are ruined by weeds; Humanity is ruined by
delusion. But indeed what is given to those whose
delusion is gone Bears great fruit.

			 Dhammapada - 358
%
Fields are ruined by weeds; Humanity is ruined by
longing. Truly, what is given to those whose
longing is gone Bears great fruit.

			 Dhammapada - 359
%
Restraint of the eye is good. Good is restraint of
the ear. Restraint of the nose is good. Good is
restraint of the tongue.

			 Dhammapada - 360
%
Restraint of the body is good. Good is restraint
of speech. Restraint of the mind is good. Good is
restraint everywhere. The monk, restrained in
every way, Is released from all suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 361
%
The one restrained in hand, foot, and speech the
fully restrained— Who is composed, solitary, and
contented, Who delights within: This one is truly
proclaimed a monk

			 Dhammapada - 362
%
Sweet is the speech of the humble monk, Who
restrains his mouth, recites the sacred texts, And
illuminates the Dhamma and its meaning.

			 Dhammapada - 363
%
The monk, delighting in the Dhamma, Devoted to the
Dhamma, Pondering the Dhamma, and Remembering the
Dhamma, Does not fall from the true Dhamma.

			 Dhammapada - 364
%
Scorn not what you have obtained, Nor be envious
of others. The jealous monk does not attain
samādhi.

			 Dhammapada - 365
%
The monk who never scorns what he has obtained,
Even if little, Who is unwearied and lives the
pure life, Is praised, even by the gods.

			 Dhammapada - 366
%
The one who is not fond of mine, Of anything of
name-and-form; Who does not grieve for what is
not: Truly, he is called monk.

			 Dhammapada - 367
%
The monk abiding in loving-kindness and Pleased in
the Buddha’s teaching, Acquires the peaceful
state, The quieting of all conditioned things:
Happiness.

			 Dhammapada - 368
%
O monk, bail out this boat! Emptied, it will go
quickly for you. Having destroyed passion and ill
will, You will go to Nibbāna.

			 Dhammapada - 369
%
Five (gross fetters) one should cut off. Five
(subtle fetters) one should abandon. And further
five (faculties) one should develop. The monk who
has overcome the five attachments Is called one
who has crossed over the torrent.

			 Dhammapada - 370
%
Meditate O monk! Do not be negligent! Do not let
your mind whirl in sensual pleasure; Do not, being
negligent, swallow the molten ball;

			 Dhammapada - 371
%
There is no meditative depth for the one without
discernment, And no discernment for the one who
does not practice meditation. But one with both
wisdom and concentration Is indeed close to
Nibbāna.

			 Dhammapada - 372
%
For the monk who enters solitude, With mind at
peace, Penetrating the Dhamma thoroughly, There is
heavenly delight.

			 Dhammapada - 373
%
When one penetrates the arising and dissipation of
the aggregates, One obtains joy and delight. For
those who know, This is the Deathless.

			 Dhammapada - 374
%
For the wise monk, here is the beginning: Guarding
one’s senses, contentment, Restraint by the
monastic precepts, Association with virtuous
friends Whose way of life is pure and unwearied.

			 Dhammapada - 375
%
Be friendly and of good will; Be skillful in
conduct. Thus would you end suffering And be
filled with joy.

			 Dhammapada - 376
%
Just as the jasmine sheds its withered flowers,
So, O monks, you should shed passion and ill will.

			 Dhammapada - 377
%
The monk who is calm in body and speech, Tranquil
and centered, Caring not for worldly gain: He is
called at peace.

			 Dhammapada - 378
%
You yourself ought to exhort yourself. You
yourself ought to scrutinize yourself. The monk
who is self-guarded and mindful Will dwell
happily.

			 Dhammapada - 379
%
You are your own protector; You are your own
guide. Therefore, restrain yourself, Like a
merchant a fine horse.

			 Dhammapada - 380
%
The monk, full of joy, pleased in the Buddha’s
teaching, Acquires the peaceful state, The
quieting of all conditioned things: Happiness.

			 Dhammapada - 381
%
Engaged in the Buddha’s teaching, Even a novice
monk illumines this world, Like the moon released
from a cloud.

			 Dhammapada - 382
%
Strive, cut off the stream, O brahmin, And drive
out sensual craving. Knowing the dissolution of
conditioned things, You, O brahmin, are a knower
of the Uncreated.

			 Dhammapada - 383
%
When the brahmin has gone to the other shore By
the twofold practice (of serenity and insight),
Then that sage’s every fetter falls away.

			 Dhammapada - 384
%
The one who is untroubled and beyond fear, For
whom there exists neither this nor the other
shore, Nor both this and the other shore: That one
I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 385
%
The pure one who sits absorbed in meditation, Who
has done what ought to be done, Who is without
toxins, having obtained the highest attainment:
That one I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 386
%
The sun shines by day, the moon by night; In armor
shines the warrior, in meditation the brahmin. But
all day and night the Buddha shines in splendor.

			 Dhammapada - 387
%
One who has warded off evil is a brahmin. One who
lives in tranquility is a renunciant. One who has
driven out one’s own impurities Is called gone
forth.

			 Dhammapada - 388
%
Strike not a brahmin, Nor should a brahmin give
way to anger. Shame on those who would strike a
brahmin, And greater shame on the brahmin who
gives way to anger.

			 Dhammapada - 389
%
For the brahmin, there is nothing better Than
restraining his mind from what it cherishes.
Whenever he turns away from the desire to harm, He
thereby appeases suffering.

			 Dhammapada - 390
%
The one who does no wrong in body, speech, and
mind, Who is restrained in these three ways: That
one I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 391
%
You should venerate your teacher by whom You
learned the true Dhamma, Taught by the Perfectly
Awakened One, Like a brahmin venerates the
sacrificial fire.

			 Dhammapada - 392
%
Neither by matted hair, nor ancestry, nor birth is
one a brahmin. The brahmin is the one with whom
there is the truth, purity, and the Dhamma.

			 Dhammapada - 393
%
What of your matted hair, O fool? What of your
deerskin clothes? You are a tangled thicket
within, Yet you groom the exterior!

			 Dhammapada - 394
%
The one wearing rags from a dust heap, Emaciated,
with veins exposed, Alone in the forest, absorbed
in meditation: That one I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 395
%
I do not proclaim a brahmin Simply by being born
of the womb, sprung from a mother. If he possesses
something he is only called self- important. The
one who has nothing, who is free from clinging:
That one I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 396
%
The one who has overcome clinging and cut off
every fetter, Who has overcome clinging and
trembles not; One unbound: That one I proclaim a
brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 397
%
The one awakened, Having cut off strap and thong,
The cord together with the bridle, Having lifted
the crossbar: That one I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 398
%
The one who endures insult, binding and beating
without anger, Whose strength is forbearance, an
army’s strength: That one I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 399
%
The one who is free of anger, who observes the
practice, Who is virtuous, restrained, and humble,
Who is in the final body: That one I proclaim a
brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 400
%
The one who is unsmeared by sensual craving, Like
water on a lotus leaf, The one who is like a
mustard seed on the point of an awl: That one I
proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 401
%
The one who realizes the dissolution of suffering,
Who has laid down the burden, Who is unbound: That
one I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 402
%
The one endowed with intelligence and deep
knowledge, Who knows what is and is not the path,
Who has attained the highest goal: That one I
proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 403
%
The one who is not given to society with
householders or monks, Who is homeless and wants
little: That one I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 404
%
The one who has set down the rod Toward both the
trembling and the firm, Who does not kill or cause
another to kill: That one I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 405
%
The one unhindered among the obstructed, Cool
among those who take up the rod, Free from
clinging among the attached: That one I proclaim a
brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 406
%
The one who has made passion, ill will, Conceit,
and hypocrisy all fall away, The one who is like a
mustard seed on the point of an awl: That one I
proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 407
%
The one who would utter words that are true,
Instructive, and gentle; Words that would anger no
one: That one I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 408
%
The one who does not take what is not given here
in the world, Be it long or short, small or large,
beautiful or ugly: That one I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 409
%
The one whose hopes are found Neither in this
world nor the next, Who is independent, unyoked:
That one I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 410
%
The one without attachments, Who by knowing is
without doubts, Who has attained immersion into
the Deathless: That one I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 411
%
The one who clings not to merit or demerit, Who is
free from sorrow, is dustless and pure: That one I
proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 412
%
The one who is like the moon, Spotless, pure,
unsullied, perfectly clear, For whom the delight
for becoming is exhausted: That one I proclaim a
brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 413
%
The one who has transcended this mire, This bad
road, this wandering, and delusion, Who has
crossed to the other shore, emancipated, Who
meditates, free from craving, clinging, and doubt:
That one I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 414
%
The one, having renounced sensual desires, Would
wander about homeless, His passions and becoming
destroyed: That one I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 415
%
The one, having renounced craving, Would wander
about homeless, His craving and becoming
destroyed: That one I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 416
%
The one who, having abandoned the human bond And
transcended the divine one, Who is indeed released
from all bonds: That one I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 417
%
One who, having left behind attraction and
aversion, Being tranquil, without attachments, A
hero, overcoming the whole world: That one I
proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 418
%
The one who has realized the dissipation and
arising of beings, Who is unattached, well-gone,
awakened: That one I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 419
%
The one whose course gods, divine musicians, And
humans do not know, Whose toxins are destroyed, an
arahant: That one I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 420
%
The one for whom there is nothing in front,
Behind, and in between, Who, having nothing, is
free from clinging: That one I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 421
%
The excellent one who is a bull, a hero, A great
sage, a conqueror, free of craving, The one who
has taken the (ritual) bath, Who is now awake:
That one I proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 422
%
The one who knows his former lives, And sees the
heavens and hells, Who has attained the end of
birth, And obtained the higher knowledge, The sage
who has achieved all accomplishments: That one I
proclaim a brahmin.

			 Dhammapada - 423
%
